401 द्वादशोऽध्यायःभक्तियोगनिष्ठानां प्राप्यभूतस्य परस्य ब्रह्मणो भगवतो नारायणस्य निरङ्कुशैश्वर्यं साक्षात्कर्तुकामाय अर्जुनाय अनवधिकातिशयकारुण्यौदार्यसौशील्यादिगुणसागरेण सत्यसंकल्पेन भगवता स्वैश्वर्यं यथावद् अवस्थितं दर्शितम् । उक्तं च तत्त्वतो भगवज्ज्ञान-दर्शनप्राप्तीनाम् ऐकान्तिकात्यन्तिकभगवद्भक्त्यैकलभ्यत्वम् । अनन्तरम् आत्मप्राप्तिसाधनभूताद् आत्मोपासनाद् भक्तिरूपस्य भगवदुपासनस्य स्वसाध्यनिष्पादने शैघ्र्यात् सुखोपादानत्वात् च श्रैष्ठ्यम्; भगवदुपासनोपायः च तदशक्तस्य अक्षरनिष्ठता तदपेक्षिताः च उच्यन्ते । भगवदुपासनस्य प्राप्यभूतोपास्यश्रैष्ठ्यात्, श्रैष्ठ्यं तु 'योगिनामपि सर्वेषां मद्गतेनान्तरात्मना । श्रद्धावान् भजते यो मां स मे युक्ततमो मतः ।' (6।47) इत्यत्र उक्तम् । अर्जुन उवाच एवं 'मत्कर्मकृत्' (11।55) इत्यादिना उक्तेन प्रकारेण सततयुक्ताः भगवन्तं त्वाम् एव परं प्राप्यं मन्वाना ये भक्ताः त्वां सकलविभूतियुक्तम् अनवधिकातिशयसौन्दर्यसौशील्यसार्वज्ञ्य-सत्यसंकल्पत्वाद्यनन्तगुणसागरं परिपूर्णम् उपासते, ये च अपि अक्षरं प्रत्यगात्मस्वरूपं तद् एव च अव्यक्तं चक्षुरादिकरणेन अनभिव्यक्तस्वरूपम् उपासते, तेषाम् उभयेषां के योगवित्तमाः के स्वसाध्यं प्रति शीघ्रगामिनः इत्यर्थः । 'भवामि न चिरात्पार्थ मय्यावेशितचेतसाम् ।।' (12।7) इति उत्तरत्र योगवित्तमत्वं शैघ्य्रविषयम् इति हि व्यञ्जयिष्यते । 1 । COMMUNION THROUGH LOVING DEVOTIONTo Arjuna, who desired to see in reality the unrestricted glory of the Lord Narayana - the Supreme Brahman who forms the final object of all who practise Bhakti Yoga - He, Narayana, revealed the same. For He, the Lord, is one whose resolves are always true, and who is an ocean of attributes like compassion, generosity, affability etc., which are limitless in excellence. It was also shown that knowledge, vision, and the attainment of the Lord can be had only by one-pointed and absolute devotion.Next in chapter 12 the following points will be explained: (l) Meditation on the Lord in the form of devotion; (2) the superiority of such meditation over that on the self, because of the speedy fulfilment of its own end; (3) the felicity of its performance; and (4) the means for meditating on the Lord.The Akshara path (i.e., meditation on the self) is for one who is incapable of meditation on the Lord and the requisites thereof. The superiority of meditation on the Lord is the result of the superiority of the object of meditation. Such superiority was indicated already in: 'He who, with faith, worships Me, whose inmost self is fixed in Me, I consider him as the most integrated among all Yogins' (6.47).There are two types of spiritual aspirants who are contrasted thus: (1) On the one hand there are those devotees who adore You 'thus'; namely, in the way taught in such text as 'Whosoever works for Me' (11.55), and who are desirous of being ever 'integrated' with You, namely, considering You as the supreme end. They adore You in utterdevotion - You, the ocean of boundless attributes of limitless excellence like grace, affability, omniscience, true resolve etc., and endowed with all glory. (2) On the other hand there are those who meditate on the 'Imperishable', (Akshara) namely, the individual self in Its true nature, which is the same as the 'Unmanifest' (Avyakta), namely that whose nature cannot be grasped by organs such as the eye etc. The question posed is: Which of these two classes of devotees have greater knowledgeof Yoga ? Who would reach their respective goals sooner? Such is the meaning of the question. Sri Krshna clearly states later on, 'O Arjuna, I become before long their redeemer from the fatal sea of recurring birthsand deaths' (12.7), with reference to the speed with which the latter kind of devotees reach Him.  
402 श्रीभगवानुवाचअत्यर्थमत्प्रियत्वेन मनो मयि आवेश्य श्रद्धया परया उपेता नित्ययुक्ता नित्ययोगं काङ्क्षमाणा ये माम् उपासते, प्राप्यविषयं मनो मयि आवेश्य ये माम् उपासते इत्यर्थः; ते युक्ततमा मे मताः । मां सुखेन अचिरात् प्राप्नुवन्ति इत्यर्थः । 2 । I consider them to be the highest among the Yogins (i.e., among those striving for realisation) - them who worship Me focusing their minds upon Me as one exceedingly dear to them, who are endowed with supreme faith, and who are ever 'integrated' with Me, namely ever desirous of constant union with Me. Those who thus worship Me, focusing their minds on Me as their supreme goal, attain Me soon and easily. Such is the meaning.  
403 ये तु अक्षरं प्रत्यगात्मस्वरूपं अनिर्देश्यं देहाद् अन्यतया देवादिशब्दानिर्देश्यम्; अत एव चक्षुरादिकरणानभिव्यक्तं सर्वत्रगम् अचिन्त्यं च सर्वत्र देवादिदेहेषु वर्तमानम् अपि तद्विसजातीयतया तेन तेन रूपेण चिन्तयितुम् अनर्हम्, तत एव कूठस्थं सर्वसाधारणं तत्तद्देवाद्यसाधारणाकारासंबन्धम् इत्यर्थः । अपरिणामित्वेन स्वासाधारणाकारात् न चलति, न च्यवते इति अचलं तत एव ध्रुवं नित्यम् सन्नियम्य इन्द्रियग्रामं चक्षुरादिकम् इन्द्रियग्रामं सर्वस्वव्यापारेभ्यः सम्यक् नियम्य सर्वत्र समबुद्धयः सर्वत्र देवादिविषमाकारेषु देहेषु अवस्थितेषु आत्मसु ज्ञानाकाकारतया समबुद्धयः, तत एव सर्वभूतहिते रताः सर्वभूताहितरतित्वात् निवृत्ताः, सर्वभूताहितरतित्वं हि आत्मनो देवादिविषमाकाराभिमाननिमित्तम्, ये एवम् अक्षरम् उपासते ते अपि मां प्राप्नुवन्ति एव । मत्समानाकारम् असंसारिणम् आत्मानं प्राप्नुवन्ति एव इत्यर्थः । 'मम साधर्म्यमागताः' (14।2) इति वक्ष्यते; श्रूयते च - 'निरञ्जनः परमं साम्यमुपैति' (मु0 उ0 3।2।3) इति । तथा अक्षरशब्दनिर्दिष्टात् कूटस्थाद् अन्यत्वं परस्य ब्रह्मणो वक्ष्यते । 'कूटस्थोऽक्षर उच्यते ।' (15।16) 'उत्तमः पुरुषस्त्वन्यः' (15।17) इति । 'अथ परा यया तदक्षरमधिगम्यते' (मु0 उ0 1।1।5) इति अक्षरविद्यायां तु अक्षरशब्दनिर्दिष्टं परम् एव ब्रह्म, भूतयोनित्वाद् एव । 3-4 । The individual self mediated upon by those who follow the path of the `Akshara' (the imperishable)is thus described: It cannot be 'defined' in terms indicated by expressions like gods and men etc., for It is different from the body; It is 'imperceptible' through the senses such as eyes; It is 'omnipresent and unthinkable,' for though It exists everywhere in bodies such as those of gods and others, It cannot be conceived in terms of thosebodies, as It is an entity of an altogether different kind; It is 'common to all beings' i.e., alike in all beings but different from the bodily forms distinguishing them; It is 'immovable' as It does not move out of Its unique nature, being unmodifiable, and therefore eternal. Such aspirants are further described as those who, 'subduing their senses' like the eyefrom their natural operations, look upon all beings of different forms as 'equal' by virtue of their knowledge of the sameness of the nature of the selves as knowers in all. Therefore they are not given 'to take pleasure in the misfortune of others,' as such feelings proceed from one's identification with one's own special bodily form. Those who meditate on the Imperishable Principle (individual self) in this way, even they come to Me. It means that they also realise their essential self, which, in respect of freedom from Samsara, is like My own Self. So Sri Krshna will declare later on: 'Partaking of My nature' (14.2). Also the Sruti says: 'Untainted, he attains supreme equality'(Mun.U.3.1.3).Likewise He Will declare the Supreme Brahman as being distinct from the freed self which is without modification and is denoted by the term 'Imperishable' (Akshara), and is described as unchanging (Kutastha). 'The Highest Person is other than this Imperishable' (15.16-17). But in the teaching in Akshara-vidya 'Now that higher science by which that Akshara is known' (Mun.U.1.5) the entity that is designated by the term Akshara is Supreme Brahman Himself; for He is the source of all beings, etc. Greater is the difficulty of those whose minds are attached to the unmanifest. The path of the unmanifest is a psychosis of the mind with the unmanifest as its object. It is accomplished with difficulty by embodied beings, who have misconceived the body as the self. For, embodied beings mistake the body for the self.  
404 तेषाम् अव्यक्तासक्तचेतसां क्लेशः तु अधिकतरः, अव्यक्ता हि गतिः अव्यक्तविषया मनोवृत्तिः देहवद्भिः देहात्माभिमानयुक्तैः दुःखेन अवाप्यते; देहवन्तो हि देहम् एव आत्मानं मन्यन्ते । 5 । The individual self mediated upon by those who follow the path of the `Akshara' (the imperishable)is thus described: It cannot be 'defined' in terms indicated by expressions like gods and men etc., for It is different from the body; It is 'imperceptible' through the senses such as eyes; It is 'omnipresent and unthinkable,' for though It exists everywhere in bodies such as those of gods and others, It cannot be conceived in terms of thosebodies, as It is an entity of an altogether different kind; It is 'common to all beings' i.e., alike in all beings but different from the bodily forms distinguishing them; It is 'immovable' as It does not move out of Its unique nature, being unmodifiable, and therefore eternal. Such aspirants are further described as those who, 'subduing their senses' like the eyefrom their natural operations, look upon all beings of different forms as 'equal' by virtue of their knowledge of the sameness of the nature of the selves as knowers in all. Therefore they are not given 'to take pleasure in the misfortune of others,' as such feelings proceed from one's identification with one's own special bodily form. Those who meditate on the Imperishable Principle (individual self) in this way, even they come to Me. It means that they also realise their essential self, which, in respect of freedom from Samsara, is like My own Self. So Sri Krshna will declare later on: 'Partaking of My nature' (14.2). Also the Sruti says: 'Untainted, he attains supreme equality'(Mun.U.3.1.3).Likewise He Will declare the Supreme Brahman as being distinct from the freed self which is without modification and is denoted by the term 'Imperishable' (Akshara), and is described as unchanging (Kutastha). 'The Highest Person is other than this Imperishable' (15.16-17). But in the teaching in Akshara-vidya 'Now that higher science by which that Akshara is known' (Mun.U.1.5) the entity that is designated by the term Akshara is Supreme Brahman Himself; for He is the source of all beings, etc. Greater is the difficulty of those whose minds are attached to the unmanifest. The path of the unmanifest is a psychosis of the mind with the unmanifest as its object. It is accomplished with difficulty by embodied beings, who have misconceived the body as the self. For, embodied beings mistake the body for the self.  
405 भगवन्तम् उपसीनानां युक्ततमत्वं सुव्यक्तम् आह -ये तु लौकिकानि देहयात्राशेषभूतानि देहधारणार्थानि च अशनादीनि कर्माणि, वैदिकानि च यागदानहोमतपःप्रभृतीनि सर्वाणि सकारणानि सोद्देश्यानि अध्यात्मचेतसा मयि संन्यस्य, मत्पराःमदेकप्राप्याः अनन्येन एव योगेन मां ध्यायन्तः उपासते, ध्यानार्चनप्रणामस्तुतिकीर्तनादीनि स्वयम् एव अत्यर्थप्रियाणि प्राप्यसमानि कुर्वन्तो माम् उपासते इत्यर्थः । तेषां मत्प्राप्तिविरोधितया मृत्युभूतात् संसाराख्यात् सागराद् अहम् अचिरेण एव कालेन समुद्धर्ता भवामि । 6-7 । The superiority of those who adore the Supreme Beingis now stated clearly:But those who, with a mind focused on Me,' the Supreme Self, and 'intent upon Me,' namely, holding Me as their sole object, dedicating to Me all their actions i.e., including all worldly actions like eating which are meant for supporting the body, as also Vedic rites like sacrifices, gifts, fire-offerings, austerities etc., generally done by worldly-minded people for other purposes - worship Me and meditate on Me with exclusive devotion, namely, with devotion without any other purpose, adoring Me by all such acts as meditation, worship, prostration, praises and hymns which are by themselves exceedingly dear to them and areequal to the end itself - to these I become soon their saviour from the sea of Samsara which, on account of its being antagonistic to the attainment of Myself, is deadly.  
406 अतः अतिशयितपुरुषार्थत्वात् सुलभत्वाद् अचिरलभ्यत्वात् च मयि एव मन आधत्स्व - मयि मनः समाधानं कुरु, मयि बुद्धिं निवेशय - अहम् एव परमप्राप्य इति अध्यवसायं कुरु । अत ऊर्ध्वं मयि एव निवसिष्यसि । अहम् एव परमप्राप्य इति अध्यवसायपूर्वकमनोनिवेशनानन्तरम् एव मयि निवसिष्यसि इत्यर्थः । 8 । 'Focus your mind on Me alone,' on account of My being the unsurpassed end of human endeavour and on My being easily attainable without delay. Focus your mind in meditation on Me alone. Let your Buddhi 'enter into Me,' strengthened by the conviction that I alone am the supreme object to be attained. Then you will 'live in Me alone,' i.e.,You will live in Me alone immediately after focusing your mind on Me by forming the conviction that I alone am the supreme object to be attained.  
407 अथ सहसा एव मयि स्थिरं चित्तं समाधातुं न शक्नोषि, ततः अभ्यासयोगेन माम् आप्तुम् इच्छ । स्वाभाविकानवधिकातिशयसौन्दर्यसौशील्यसौहार्दवात्सल्यकारुण्यमाधुर्यगाम्भीर्यौदार्यशौर्य-वीर्यपराक्रमसर्वज्ञत्वसत्यकामत्वसत्यसंकल्पत्वसर्वेश्वरत्वसकलकारणत्वाद्यसंख्येयकल्याण-गुणसागरे निखिलहेयप्रत्यनीके मयि निरतिशयप्रेमगर्भस्मृत्यभ्यासयोगेन स्थिरं चित्तसमाधानं लब्ध्वा मां प्राप्तुम् इच्छ । 9 । Now, if you are unable to focus your mind immediately on Me in deep meditation, then seek to reach Me by the 'practice of repetition (Abhyasa Yoga)'. By the repeated practice of remembrance full of immense love, concentrate your mind on Me the ocean of manifold attributes innate toMe like, beauty, affability, friendliness, affection, compassion, sweetness, majesty, magnanimity, heroism, valour, might, omniscience, freedom from wants, unfailing resolves, sovereignty over all, being the cause of all etc., and being antagonistic to all that is evil. All these attributes are of unlimited excellence in the Supreme Person.  
408 अथ एवंविधस्मृत्यभ्यासे अपि असमर्थः असि मत्कर्मपरमो भव, मदीयानि कर्माणि आलयनिर्माणोद्यानकरणप्रदीपारोपणमार्जनाभ्युक्षणोपलेपनपुष्पापहरणपूजनोद्वर्तननामकीर्तन-प्रदक्षिणनमस्कारस्तुत्यादीनि, तानि अत्यर्थप्रियत्वेन आचर । अत्यर्थप्रियत्वेन मदर्थं कर्माणि कुर्वन् अपि अचिराद् अभ्यासयोगपूर्विकां मयि स्थिरां चित्तस्थितिं लब्ध्वा मत्प्राप्तिरूपां सिद्धिम् अवाप्स्यसि । 10 । If you are Incapable of practising remembrance in the above manner, then devote yourself to 'My deeds'. Such devotional acts consist in the construction of temples, laying out temple gardens, lighting up lamps therein, sweeping, sprinkling water and plastering the floor of holyshrines, gathering flowers, engaging in My worship, chanting My names,circumambulating My temples, praising Me, prostrating before Me etc. Do these with great affection. Even performing such works which are exceedingly dear to Me, you will, before long, get your mind steadily focussed on Me as through the practice of repetitions, and will gainperfection through attaining Me.  
409 अथ मद्योगम् आश्रित्य एतद् अपि कर्तुं न शवनोषि, मद्गुणानुसंधानकृतं मदेकप्रियत्वाकारं भक्तियोगम् आश्रित्य भक्तियोगाङ्गरूपम् एतद् मत्कर्म अपि कर्तुं न शकनोषि; ततः अक्षरयोगम् आत्मस्वभावानुसंधानरूपं परभक्तिजननं पूर्वषट्कोदितम् आश्रित्य तदुपायतया सर्वकर्मफलत्यागं कुरु । मत्प्रियत्वेन मदेकप्राप्यताबुद्धिः हि प्रक्षीणाशेषपापस्य एव जायते;यतात्मवान् यतमनस्कः । ततः अनभिसंहितफलेन मदाराधनरूपेण अनुष्ठितेन कर्मणा सिद्धेनआत्मज्ञानेन निवृत्ताविद्यादिसर्वतिरोधाने मच्छेषतैकस्वरूपे प्रत्यगात्मनि साक्षात्कृते सति मयि परा भक्तिः स्वयम् एव उत्पद्यते । तथा च वक्ष्यते - 'स्वकर्मणा तमभ्यर्च्य सिद्धिं विन्दति मानवः।' (18।46) इत्यारभ्य ' विमुच्य निर्ममः शान्तो ब्रह्मभूयाय कल्पते ।। ब्रह्मभूतः प्रसन्नात्मा न शोचति न काङ्क्षति ।। समः सर्वेषु भूतेषु मद्भक्तिं लभते पराम्।' (18।53-54) इति । 11 । If you are unable to do even this 'taking refuge in My Yoga,' i.e., if you are unable even to do actions for My sake, which forms the sprout of Bhakti Yoga, wherein through meditation I am made the exclusive and sole objectof love - then you should resort to Akshara Yoga described in the first six chapters. It consists in contemplation on the nature of the individual self. This engenders devotion to the Lord. As a means for practice of this (Akshara Yoga), renounce the fruit of every action. The state of mind that holds Me as the only worthy object of attainment and love arises only when all the sins of an aspirant are destroyed without exception. 'One with a controlled mind' means one with the mind subdued. When the individual self is visualised to be of the nature of a Sesha (subsidiary) to the lord, and when the veil of nescience consisting in identifying the self with the body is removed by contemplation on theself generated through the performance of works without attachment to the fruits and with My propitiation as the sole objective - then supremeBhakti to Me will originate by itself. [The point driven home is this: It is nescience that stands between the Jiva and the Lord. This nescience consists in identification of the self with the body. It is through works done without an eye on their fruits but exclusively as an offering to theLord, that this nescience is removed. Thus Karma Yoga is the sprout of self-realisation, and of Bhakti. On the nescience being removed, the knowledge that one (i.e., the Jiva) is a Sesha (an absolutely dependent liege) of the Lord, dawns on the Jiva. Such knowledge generates exclusive devotion or Bhakti accompanied by Prapatti. Or if the Jiva getsimmersed in Its own bliss, It will attain Kaivalya]. In the same manner, Sri Krshna will further show in the text beginning with 'By worshipping Him with his work will a man reach perfection' (18.46) and ending with 'Forsaking the feeling of 'I' and with no feeling of "mine" and tranquil, one becomes worthy of the state of Brahman. Having realised the state of Brahman, tranquil, he neither grieves nor craves. Regarding all beings alike, he attains supreme devotion to Me' (18.53-54).  
410 अत्यर्थप्रीतिविरहितात् कर्कशरूपात् स्मृत्यभ्यासाद् अक्षरयाथात्म्यानुसंधानपूर्वकं तदापरोक्ष्यज्ञानम् एव आत्महितत्वे विशिष्यते; आत्मापरोक्ष्यज्ञानाद् अपि अनिष्पन्नरूपात् तदुपायभूतात्मध्यानम् एव आत्महितत्वे विशिष्यते, तद्ध्यानाद् अपि अनिष्पन्नरूपात् तदुपायभूतं फलत्यागेन अनुष्ठितं कर्म एव विशिष्यते । अनभिसंहितफलाद् अनुष्ठितात् कर्मणः अनन्तरम् एव निरस्तपापतया मनसः शान्तिः भविष्यति,शान्ते मनसि आत्मध्यानं संपत्स्यते; ध्यानाद् ज्ञानं ज्ञानात् च तदापरोक्ष्यं तदापरोक्ष्यात् परा भक्तिः, इति भक्तियोगाभ्यासाशक्तस्य आत्मनिष्ठा एव श्रेयसी । आत्मनिष्ठस्य अपि अशान्तमनसो निष्ठाप्राप्तये अन्तर्गतात्मज्ञानानभिसंहितफलकर्मनिष्ठा एव श्रेयसी इत्यर्थः । 12 । More than the practice of remembrance (of the Lord), which is difficult in the absence of love for the Lord, the direct knowledge of the self, arising from the contemplation of the imperishable self (Akshara), is conducive to the well-being of the self. Better than the imperfect knowledge of the self, is perfect meditation on the self, as it is moreconducive to the well-being of the self. More conducive than imperfect meditation (i.e., meditation unaccompanied with renunciation), is the activity performed with renunciation of the fruits. It is only after the annihilation of sins, through the performance of worksaccompanied by renunciation of fruits, that peace of mind is attained. When the mind is at peace, perfect meditation on the self is possible. From meditation results the direct realisation of the self. From the directrealisation of the self results supreme devotion. It is in this way that Atmanishtha or devotion to the individual self becomes useful for a person who is incapable of practising loving devotion to the Supreme Being. And for one practising the discipline for attaining the self (Jnana Yoga) without acquisition of perfect tranquility of mind, disinterestedactivity (Karma Yoga), including in it meditation on the self, is the better path for the knowledge of the self. [Thus the steps are performance of works without desire for fruits, equanimity of mind, meditation on the self, self-realisation, and devotion to the Lord].  
411 अनभिसंहितफलकर्मनिष्ठस्य उपादेयान् गुणान् आह -अद्वेष्टा सर्वभूतानां विद्विषताम् अपकुर्वताम् अपि सर्वेषां भूतानाम् अद्वेष्टा मदपराधानुगुणम् ईश्वरप्रेरितानि एतानि भूतानि द्विषन्ति अपकुर्वन्ति च इति अनुसंदधानः, तेषु द्विषत्सु अपकुर्वत्सु च सर्वभूतेषु मैत्रीं मतिं कुर्वन् मैत्रः, तेषु एव दुःखितेषु करुणां कुर्वन् करुणः, निर्ममः - देहेन्द्रियेषु तत्सम्बन्धिषु च निर्ममः, निरहंकारः - देहात्माभिमानरहितः, तत एव समदुःखसुखः सुखदुःखागमयोः सांकल्पिकयोः हर्षोद्वेगरहितः, क्षमी स्पर्शप्रभवयोः अवर्जनीययोः अपि तयोः विकाररहितः, संतुष्टः यदृच्छोपनतेन येन केन अपि देहधारणद्रव्येन संतुष्टः, सततं योगी सततं प्रकृतिवियुक्तात्मानुसंधानपरः, यतात्मा नियमितमनोवृत्तिः, दृढनिश्चयः - अध्यात्मशास्त्रोदितेषु अर्थेषु दृढनिश्चयः, मय्यर्पितमनोबुद्विः भगवान् वासुदेव एव अनभिसंहितफलेन अनुष्ठितेन कर्मणा आराध्यते; आराधितश्च मम आत्मापरोक्ष्यं साधयिष्यति इति मय्यर्पितमनोबुद्धिः, एवंभूतो मद्भक्तः एवंभूतेन कर्मयोगेन मां भजमानो यः स मे प्रियः । 13-14 । Now Sri Krshna enumerates the attributes required of one intent on performance of disinterested activity:In these and succeeding verses the Lord mentions the nature of the Karma Yogi who adores Him through his works. In other words the Bhakti element in Karma Yoga is emphasised. He never hates any beingeven though they hate him and do him wrong. For he thinks that the Lord Impels these beings to hate him and do him wrong for atoning for his transgressions. He is 'friendly', evincing a friendly disposition towards all beings whether they hate him or do him wrong. He is 'compassionate', evincing compassion towards their sufferings. He is free from the 'feeling of mine,' i.e., he is not possessive with regard to his body, senses and all things associated with them. He is free from the feeling of 'I', i.e., is free from the delusion that his body is the self. Therefore, 'pain and pleasure are the same to him,' i.e., he is free from distress and delight resulting from pain and pleasure arising from his deeds. He is 'enduring', unaffected even by those two (i.e., pleasure and pain) due to the inevitable contact of sense-objects; He is 'content',namely, satisfied with whatever chance may bring him for the sustenanceof his body. He 'ever meditates, i.e., is constantly intent on contemplating on the self as separate from the body. He is 'self-restrained', namely, he controls the activities of his mind. He is of 'firm conviction' regardingthe meanings taught in the science of the self. His 'mind and reason are dedicated to Me' i.e., his mind and reason are dedicated to Me in the form 'Bhagavan Vasudeva alone is propitiated by disinterested activities, and when duly propitiated, He will bring about for me the direct vision of the self.' Such a devotee of mine, i.e., who works in this manner as a Karma Yogin, is dear to Me .  
412 यस्मात् कर्मनिष्ठात् पुरुषान्निमित्तभूतात् लोको न उद्विजते, यः लोकोद्वेगकरं कर्म किंचिद् अपि न करोति इत्यर्थः । लोकात् च निमित्तभूताद् यः न उद्विजते, यम् उद्दिश्य सर्वलोको न उद्वेगकरं कर्म करोति, सर्वाविरोधित्वनिश्चयात् । अत एव कंचन प्रति हर्षेण, कंचन प्रति अमर्षेण, कंचन प्रति भयेन, कंचन प्रति उद्वेगेन मुक्तः एवंभूतः यः सः अपि मे प्रियः । 15 । That person who is engaged in Karma Yoga does not become the cause of 'fear to the world'; he does nothing to cause fear to the world. He has no cause to 'fear the world,' i.e., no action on the part of others can cause him fear because of the certainty that he is not inimical to the world.Therefore he is not in the habit of showing favour towards someone and intolerance towards others; he has no fear of some or repulsion for others. Such a person is dear to Me.  
413 अनपेक्षः - आत्मव्यतिरिक्ते कृत्स्ने वस्तुनि अनपेक्षः, शुचिः - शास्त्रविहितद्रव्यवर्धितकायः, दक्षः - शास्त्रीयक्रियोपादानसमर्थः अन्यत्र उदासीनः, गतव्यथः - शास्त्रीयक्रियानिर्वृत्तौ अवर्जनीयशीतोष्णपरुषस्पर्शादिदुःखेषु व्यथारहितः, सर्वारम्भपरित्यागी - शास्त्रीयव्यतिरिक्त-सर्वकर्मारम्भपरित्यागी, य एवंभूतो मद्भक्तः स मे प्रियः । 16 । He who is free from 'desires', i.e., who has no longing for anything except the self; who is 'pure', namely, whose body is nourished on the food prescribed by the Sastras; who is an 'expert' namely, who is an expert in performing actions prescribed by the Sastras; who is 'indifferent', i.e., not interested in matters other than those enjoined by the Sastras; who is free from 'agony', i.e., of pain caused by heat, cold, contact with coarse things etc. which are inevitably associated with the performance of rites prescribed by the Sastras; who renounces all 'undertakings', i.e., who renounces all undertakings except those demanded by the Sastras - the devotee who is like this is dear to Me.  
414 यो न हृष्यति यद् मनुष्याणां हर्षनिमित्तं प्रियजातं तत् प्राप्य यः कर्मयोगी न हृष्यति, यत् च अप्रियं तत् प्राप्य यो न द्वेष्टि, यत् च मनुष्याणां शोकनिमित्तं भार्यापुत्रवित्तक्षयादिकं तत् प्राप्य न शोचति; तथाविधम् अप्राप्तं च न कांक्षति, यत् च मनुष्याणां हर्षनिमित्तभार्यावित्तादि, तद् अप्राप्तं च न काङ्क्षति इत्यर्थः । शुभाशुभपरित्यागी पापवत् पुण्यस्य अपि बन्धहेतुत्वाविशेषाद् उभयपरित्यागी, यः एवंभूतो भक्तिमान् स मे प्रियः । 17 । He who does not 'rejoice', i.e., that Karma Yogin, who, on obtaining things which cause joy to man, does not rejoice; who does not 'hate', does not hate on obtaining anything undesirable; who is not 'grieved' by common sorrows which cause grief among men, as the loss of wife, son,fortune etc., who 'does not desire' anything like wife, son, fortune etc., not already acquired by him; who 'renounces good and evil,' i.e., who renounces both merit and demerit because, like demerit, merit also causes bondage: there being no difference between them in this respect - he who is like this and devoted to Me is dear to Me.  
415 'अद्वेष्टा सर्वभूतानाम्' (12।13) इत्यादिना शत्रुमित्रादिषु द्वेषादिरहितत्वम् उक्तम् । अत्र तेषु सन्निहितेषु अपि समचित्तत्वम्, ततः अपि अतिरिक्तो विशेष उच्यते । आत्मनि स्थिरमतित्वेन निकेतनादिषु असक्त इति अनिकेतः, तत एव मानापमानादिषु अपि समः, य एवंभूतो भक्तिमान् स मे प्रियः । 18-19 । The absence of hate etc., towards foes, friends etc., has already been taught in the stanza beginning with, 'He who never hates any being' (11.13). What is now taught is that equanimity to be practised even whensuch persons mentioned above are present before one who is superior tothose having a general equanimous temperament referred to earlier. Who has no 'home', namely, who is not attached tohome, etc., as he possesses firmness of mind with regard to the self. Because of this, he is 'same even in honour and dishonour'. He who is devoted to Me and who is like this - he is dear to Me.  
416 धर्म्यं च अमृतं च इति धर्म्यामृतं ये तु प्राप्यसमं प्रापकं भक्तियोगं यथोक्तं 'मय्यावेश्य मनो ये माम्' (12।2) इत्यादिना उक्तेन प्रकारेण उपासते ते भक्ता अतितरां मे प्रियाः । 20 । Showing the superiority of Bhakti-Nishtha over Atma-nishtha, Sri Krshna now concludes in accordance with what is stated at the beginning of this chapter in Verse 2.But those who follow Bhakti yoga - 'which is a nectar of virtuous duty,' i.e., which is at once virtuous duty and nectar, and which even as a means, is equal to its end in conferring bliss on those Who follow it as stated above, i.e., in the manner taught in the stanza beginning with 'Those Who, focusing their minds on Me' (12.2) - such devotees areexceedingly dear to Me.  
