004 एवम् उपविष्टे पार्थे कुतः अयम् अस्थाने समुत्थितः शोकः इति आक्षिप्य तम् इमं विषमस्थं शोकम् अविद्वत्सेवितंं परलोकविरोधिनम् अकीर्तिकरम् अतिक्षुद्रं हृदयदौर्बल्यकृतं परित्यज्य युद्धाय उत्तिष्ठ इति श्रीभगवान् उवाच । 1-3 । Communion through Knowledge
When Arjuna thus sat, the Lord, opposing his action,
said: 'What is the reason for your misplaced grief? Arise for
battle, abandoning this grief, which has arisen in a critical
situation, which can come only in men of wrong understanding, 
which is art obstacle for reaching heaven, which
does not confer fame on you, which is very mean, and
which is caused by faint-heartedness.
  
005 पुनरपि पार्थः स्नेहकारुण्यधर्माधर्मभयाकुलो भगवदुक्तं हिततमम् अजानन् इदम् उवाच । भीष्मद्रोणादिकान् बहुमन्तव्यान् गुरून् कथम् अहं हनिष्यामि कथन्तरां भोगेष्वतिमात्रसक्तान् तान् हत्वा तैः भुज्यमानान् तान् एव भोगान् तद्रुधिरेण उपसिच्य तेषु आसनेषु उपविश्य भुञ्जीय । 4-5 । Again Arjuna, being moved by love, compassion and
fear, mistaking unrighteousness for righteousness, and not
understanding, i.e., not knowing the beneficial words of Sri
Krshna, said as follows: 'How can I slay Bhishma, Drona and
others worthy of reverence? After slaying those elders,
though they are intensely attached to enjoyments, how can
I enjoy those very pleasures which are now being enjoyed by
them? For, it will be mixed with their blood.
  
006 एवं युद्धम् आरभ्य निवृत्तव्यापारान् भवतो धार्तराष्ट्राः प्रसह्य हन्युः इति चेत्, अस्तु, तल्लब्धविजयात् अधर्म्याद् अस्माकं धर्माधर्मौ अजानद्भिः तैः हननम् एव गरीयः इति मे प्रतिभाति इति उक्त्वा यत् मह्यं श्रेयः इति निश्चितं तत् शरणागताय तव शिष्याय मे ब्रूहि इति अतिमात्रकृपणो भगवत्पादाम्बुजम् उपससार । 6-8 । If you say, , After beginning the war, if we withdraw from
the battle, the sons of Dhrtarashtra will slay us all forcibly',
be it so. I think that even to be killed by them, who do not
know tlte difference between righteousness and unrighteousness
is better for us than gaining unrighteous victory by
killing them. After saying so, Arjuna surrendered himself
at the feet of the Lord, overcome with dejection, saying,
'Teach me, your disciple, who has taken refuge in you,
what is good for me.'  

007 एवं अस्थाने समुपस्थितस्नेहकारुण्याभ्याम् अप्रकृतिं गतं क्षत्रियाणां युद्धं परमं धर्मम् अपि अधर्मं मन्वानं धर्मबुभुत्सया च शरणागतं पार्थम् उद्दिश्य आत्मयाथात्म्यज्ञानेन युद्धस्य फलाभिसन्धिरहितस्य स्वधर्मस्य आत्मयाथार्थ्यप्राप्त्युपायताज्ञानेन च विना अस्य मोहो न शाम्यति इति मत्वा भगवता परमपुरुषेण अध्यात्मशास्त्रावतरणं कृतम् । तदुक्तम् 'अस्थाने स्नेहकारुण्यधर्माधर्मधियाकुलम् । पार्थं प्रपन्नमुद्दिश्य शास्त्रावतरणं  कृतम् ।।' (गीतार्थसंग्रह 5) इति ।।तम् एवं देहात्मनोः याथात्म्याज्ञाननिमित्तशोकाविष्टं देहातिरिक्तात्मज्ञाननिमित्तं च धर्मं भाषमाणं परस्परं विरुद्धगुणान्वितम् उभयोः सेनयोः युद्धाय उद्युक्तयोः मध्ये अकस्मात् निरुद्योगं पार्थम् आलोक्य परमपुरुषः प्रहसन् इव इदम् उवाच । परिहासवाक्यं वदन् इव आत्मपरमात्मयाथात्म्यतत्प्राप्त्युपायभूतकर्मयोगज्ञानयोगभक्तियोगगोचरम् 'न त्वेवाहं जातु नासम्' (गीता 2।12) इत्यारभ्य 'अहं त्वा सर्वपापेभ्यो मोक्षयिष्यामि मा शुचः ।' (गीता 18।66) इत्येतदन्तम् उवाच इत्यर्थः । 1-10 ।
 Thus, the Lord, the Supreme Person, introduced the
Sastra regarding the self for the sake of Arjuna - 'Whose
natural courage was lost due to love and compassion in a
misplaced situation, who thought war to be unrighteous
even though it was the highest duty for warriors (Kshatriyas), and who took refuge in Sri Krshna to know what his right duty was, thinking that Arjuna's delusion would not
come to an end except by the knowledge of the real nature
of the self, and that war was an ordained duty here which,
when freed from attachment to fruits, is a means for
self-knowledge. Thus, has it been said by Sri Yamunacarya:
'The introduction to the Sastra was begun for the sake of
Arjuna, whose mind was agitated by misplaced love and
compassion. and by the delusion that righteousness was
unrighteousness, and who took refuge in Sri Krshna.'
The Supreme Person spoke these words as if smiling, and
looking at Arjuna, who was thus overcome by grief result
ing from ignorance about the real nature of the body and
the self, but was nevertheless speaking about duty as if he
had an understanding that the self is distinct from the body,
and while he (Arjuna), torn between contradictory ideas,
had suddenly become inactive standing between the two
armies that were getting ready to fight. Sri Krshna said, as if
in ridicule, to Arjuna the words beginning with, 'There
never was a time when I did not exist' (11.12), and ending
with 'I will release you from all sins; grieve not!' 
(XVIII.66) - which have for their contents the real nature
 of the self, of the Supreme Self, and of the paths of work 
(Karma), knowledge (Jnana) and devotion (Bhakti) which 
constitute the means for attaining the highest spiritual ful
filment.
  
008 अशोच्यान् प्रति अनुशोचसि 'पतन्ति पितरो ह्येषां लुप्तपिण्डोदकक्रियाः ।' (गीता 1।41) इत्यादिकान् देहात्मस्वभावप्रज्ञानिमित्तवादान् च भाषसे । देहात्मस्वभावज्ञानवतां न अत्र किंचित् शोकनिमित्तम् अस्ति । गतासून् देहान् अगतासून् आत्मनश्च प्रति तयोः स्वभावयाथात्म्यविदो न शोचन्ति । अतः त्वयि विप्रतिषिद्वम् इदम् उपलभ्यते, यद् 'एतान् हनिष्यामि' इति अनुशोचनं यत् च देहातिरिक्तात्मज्ञानकृतं धर्माधर्मभाषणम् । अतो देहस्वभावं च न जानासि, तदतिरिक्तम् आत्मानं च नित्यम्, तत्प्राप्त्युपायभूतं युद्धादिकं धर्मं च । इदं च युद्धं फलाभिसन्धिरहितम् । आत्मयाथात्म्यावाप्त्युपायभूतम् । आत्मा हि न जन्माधीनसद्भावो न मरणाधीनविनाशश्च; तस्य जन्ममरणयोः अभावात्; अतः स न शोकस्थानम् ।  देहः तु अचेतनः परिणामस्वभावः, तस्य उत्पत्तिविनाशयोगः स्वाभाविकः, इति सोऽपि न शोकस्थानम् इति अभिप्रायः । 11 । You are grieving for those who do not deserve to be
grieved for. You also speak words of wisdom about the
nature of the body and the self as follows: 'The ancestors
fall degraded, deprived of the ritual oblations of food and
water' (I.42). There is no reason for such grief for those who
possess the knowledg'e of the nature of the body and the
self, Those who know the exact truth will not grieve for
those bodies from which life has departed and for those
from whom the principle of life has not departed, They do
not grieve for bodies or souls.

Hence, in you this contradiction is visible - your grief at
the thought 'I shall slay them?' and at the same time your
talk about righteousness and unrighteousness, as if it were
the result of knowledge of the self as distinct from the body.
Therefore you do not know the nature of the body nor of
the self which is distinct from the body and is eternal. Nor
do you know of duties like war etc., which ( as duty) constitute
the means for the attainment of the self, nor of the fact
that this war (which forms a duty in the present context), if
fought without any selfish desire for results, is a means for
the attainment of the knowledge of the true nature of the 
self.

The implied meaning is this: This self, verily, is not
dependent on the body for Its existence, nor is It subjected
to destruction on the death of the body, as there is no birth
or death for It. Therefore there is no cause for grief. But
the body is insentient by nature, is subject to change, and its
birth and death are natural; thus it (body) too is not to be
grieved for.

  
009 प्रथमं तावद् आत्मनां स्वभावं शृणु - अहं सर्वेश्वरः तावद् अतो वर्तमानात् पूर्वस्मिन् अनादौ काले न नासम् अपि तु आसम् । त्वन्मुखाः त एते ईशितव्याः क्षेत्रज्ञा न नासन् अपि त्वासन् । अहं च यूयं च सर्वे वयमतः परम् अस्माद् अनन्तरे काले न चैव न भविष्यामः अपि तु भविष्याम एव । यथा अहं सर्वेश्वरः परमात्मा नित्य इति न अत्र संशयः, तथैव भवन्तः क्षेत्रज्ञा आत्मानः अपि नित्या एव इति मन्तव्याः ।एवं भगवतः सर्वेश्वराद् आत्मनां परस्परं च भेदः पारमार्थिकः, इति भगवता एव उक्तम् इति प्रतीयते । अज्ञानमोहितं प्रति तन्निवृत्तये पारमार्थिकनित्यत्वोपदेशसमये 'अहम्' 'त्वम्' 'इमे' 'सर्वे' 'वयम्' इति व्यपदेशात् । औपाधिकात्मभेदवादे हि आत्मभेदस्य अतात्त्विकत्वेन तत्त्वोपदेशसमये भेदनिर्देशो न संगच्छते ।भगवदुक्तात्मभेदः स्वाभाविकः, इति श्रुतिः अपि आह - 'नित्यो नित्यानां चेतनश्चेतनानामेको बहूनां यो विदधाति कामान् ।' (श्वेता0 6।13) इति । नित्यानां बहूनां चेतनानां य एकः चेतनो नित्यः स कामान् विदधाति इत्यर्थः । अज्ञानकृतभेददृष्टिवादे तु परमपुरुषस्य परमार्थदृष्टेःनिर्विशेषकूटस्थनित्यचैतन्यात्मयाथात्म्यसाक्षात्कारात् निवृत्ताज्ञानतत्कार्यतया अज्ञानकृतभेददर्शनं तन्मूलोपदेशादिव्यवहाराः च न संगच्छन्ते ।अथ परमपुरुषस्य अधिगताद्वैतज्ञानस्य बाधितानुवृत्तिरूपम् इदं भेदज्ञानं दग्धपटादिवत् न बन्धकम् इति उच्येत, न एतत् उपपद्यते; मरीचिकाजलज्ञानादिकं हि बाधितम् अनुवर्तमानम् अपि न जलाहरणादिप्रवृत्तिहेतुः । एवम् अत्र अपि अद्वैतज्ञानेन बाधितं भेदज्ञानम् अनुवर्तमानम् अपि मिथ्यार्थविषयत्वनिश्चयात् न उपदेशादिप्रवृत्तिहेतुः भवति । न च ईश्वरस्य पूर्वम् अज्ञस्य शास्त्राधिगततत्त्वज्ञानतया बाधितानुवृत्तिः शक्यते वक्तुम्; 'यः सर्वज्ञः सर्ववित्' (मु0उ0 2।1।9)'परास्य शक्तिर्विविधैव श्रूयते स्वाभाविकी ज्ञानबलक्रिया च ।' (श्वेता0 6।8) 'वेदाहं समतीतानि वर्तमानानि चार्जुन । भविष्याणि च भूतानि मां तु वेद न कश्चन ।।' (गीता 7।26) इति श्रुतिस्मृतिविरोधात् ।किं च परमपुरुषश्च इदानीन्तनगुरुपरम्परा च अद्वितीयात्मस्वरूपनिश्चये सति अनुवर्तमाने अपि भेदज्ञाने स्वनिश्चयानुरूपम् अद्वितीयम् आत्मज्ञानं कस्मै उपदिशति इति वक्तव्यम् ।प्रतिबिम्बवत्प्रतीयमानेभ्यः अर्जुनादिभ्यः इति चेत्, न एतत् उपपद्यते; न हि अनुन्मत्तः कोऽपि मणिकृपाणदर्पणादिषु प्रतीयमानेषु स्वात्मप्रतिबिम्बेषु तेषांं स्वात्मनः अनन्यत्वं जानन् तेभ्यः कमपि अर्थम् उपदिशति ।बाधितानुवृत्तिः अपि तैः न शक्यते वक्तुम्; बाधकेन अद्वितीयात्मज्ञानेन आत्मव्यतिरिक्त-भेदज्ञानकारणस्य अज्ञानादेः विनष्टत्वात् । द्विचन्द्रज्ञानादौ तु चन्द्रैकत्वज्ञानेन पारमार्थिक-तिमिरादिदोषस्य द्विचन्द्रज्ञानहेतोः अविनष्टत्वाद् बाधितानुवृत्तिः युक्ता । अनुवर्तमानम् अपि प्रबलप्रमाणबाधितत्वेन अकिंचित्करम् । इह तु भेदज्ञानस्य सविषयस्य सकारणस्य अपारमार्थिकत्वेन वस्तुयाथात्म्यज्ञानविनष्टत्वात् न कथंचिद् अपि बाधितानुवृत्तिः संभवति ।अतः सर्वेश्वरस्य इदानीन्तनगुरुपरम्परायाः च तत्त्वज्ञानम् अस्ति चेद् भेददर्शनतत्कार्योप-देशाद्यसंभवः । भेददर्शनमस्ति इति चेद्, अज्ञानस्य तद्धेतोः स्थितत्वेन अज्ञत्वाद् एव सुतराम् उपदेशो न संभवति ।किं च गुरोः अद्वितीयात्मविज्ञानाद् एव ब्रह्माज्ञानस्य सकार्यस्य विनष्टत्वात् शिष्यं प्रति उपदेशो निष्प्रयोजनः । गुरुः तज्ज्ञानं च कल्पितम् इति चेत्, शिष्यतज्ज्ञानयोः अपि कल्पितत्वात्तदपि अनिवर्त्तकम् । कल्पितत्वेऽपि पूर्वविरोधित्वेन निवर्त्तकम् इति चेत्, तदाचार्यज्ञानेऽपिसमानम् इति तद् एव निवर्तकं भवति, इति उपदेशानर्थक्यम् एव; इति कृतम् असमीचीनवादैः निरस्तैः । 12 । First listen about the nature of the self: -Indeed, I, the Lord of all, who is eternal, was never
non-existent, but existed always. It is not that these selves
like you, who are subject to My Lordship, did not exist; you
have always existed. It is not that 'all of us' , I and you, shall
cease to be 'in the future', i.e., beyond the present time; we
shall always exist. Even as no doubt can be entertained that
I, the Supreme Self and Lord of all, am eternal, likewise,
you (Arjuna and all others) who are embodied selves, also
should be considered eternal.
The foregoing implies that the difference between the
Lord, the sovereign over all, and the individual selves, as
also the differences among the individual selves themselves
are real. This has been declared by the'Lord Himself. 
For, different terms like 'I', 'you', 'these', 'all' and 'we'
have been used by the Lord while explaining the truth of
eternality in order to remove the misunderstanding of
Arjuna who is deluded by ignorance.
[Now follows a refutation of the Upadhi theory of Bhaskara 
and the Ignorance theory of the Advaitins which deny
any ultimate difference between the Lord and the Jivas. ]

If we examine (Bhaskara's) theory of Upadhis (adjuncts),
which states that the apparent differences among Jivas are
due to adjuncts, it will have to be admitted that mention
about differences is out of place when explaining the ultimate
truth, because the theory holds that there are no such
differences in reality. But that the differences mentioned by
the Lord are natural, is taught by the Sruti also: 'Eternal
among eternals, sentient among sentients, the one, who ful
fils the desires of the many' (Sve.U.VI.13, Ka.U.V.13).

The meaning of the text is: Among the eternal sentient
beings who are countless, He, who is the Supreme Spirit,
fulfils the desires of all. 

As regards the theory of the Advaitins that the perception
of difference is brought about by ignorance only and is
not really real, the Supreme Being - whose vision must be
true and who, therefore must have an immediate cognition
of the difference less and immutable and eternal consciousness
as constituting the nature of the Atman in all authenticity
and who must thereby be always free from all ignorance
and its effects- cannot possibly perceive the so-called
difference arising from ignorance. It is, therefore, unimaginable
that He engages himself in activities such as teaching
which can proceed only from such a perception of differences
arising from ignorance.

The argument that the Supreme Being, though possessed
of the understanding of non-duality, can still have the
awareness of such difference persisting even after sublation
just as a piece of cloth may have been burnt up and yet
continues to have the appearance of cloth, and that such a
continuance of the sublated does not cause bondage- such
an argument is invalid in the light of another analogy of a
similar kind, namely, the perception of the mirage, which,
when understood to be what it is, does not make one
endeavour to fetch water therefrom. In the same way even
if the impression of difference negated by the non-dualistic
illumination persists, it cannot impel one to activities such
as teaching; for the object to whom the instruction is to be
imparted is discovered to be unreal. The idea is that just as
the discovery of the non-existence of water in a mirage
stops all effort to get water from it, so also when all duality
is sublated by illumination, no activity like teaching disciples
etc., can take place.

Nor can the Lord be conceived as having been previously
ignorant and as attaining knowledge of unity through the
scriptures, and as still being'subject to the continuation of
the stultified experiences. Such a position would stand in
contradiction to the Sruti and the Smrti: 'He, who is
all-comprehender' (Mun .U., 1.1.9) ; all knower and supreme
and natural power of varied types are spoken of
in Srutis, such as knowledge, strength and action'
(Sve.U.6.8); 'I know, Arjuna, all beings of the past,
present and future but no one knows Me,' etc. (Gita 7.26).

And again, if the perception of difference and distinction
are said to persist even after the unitary Self has been decisively
understood, the question will arise - to whom will the
Lord and the succession of teachers of the tradition impart,
the knowledge in accordance with their understanding? 
The question needs an answer. The idea is that knowledge
of non-duality and perception of differences cannot
co-exist. If it be replied by Advaitins holding the
Bimba-Pratibimba (the original and reflections) theory that
teachers give instructions to their own reflections in the
form of disciples such as Arjuna, it would amount to an
absurdity.

For, no one who is not out of his senses would undertake
to give any instruction to his own reflections in mediums
such as a precious stone, the blade of a sword or a mirror,
knowing, as he does, that they are non-different from himself
The theory of the persistence of the sublated is thus
impossible to maintain, as the knowledge of the unitary self
destroys the beginningless ignorance in which differences
falling outside the self are supposed to be rooted. 'The persistence
of the sublated' does occur in cases such as the vision
of the two moons, where the cause of the vision is the
result of some real defect in eyesight, not removable by the
right understanding of the singleness of the moon. Even
though the perception of the the two moons may continue,
the sublated cognition is rendered inconsequential on the
strength of strong contrary evidence. For, it will not lead to
any activity appropriate for a real experience.

But in the present context (i.e:, the Advaitic), 
the conception of difference, whose object and cause are 
admittedly unreal, is cancelled by the knowledge of reality. 
So the 'persistence of the sublated' can in no way happen.
Thus, if the Supreme Lord and the present succession of
preceptors have attained the understanding of (Non-dual)
reality, their perception of difference and work such as
teaching proceeding from that perception, are impossible.
If, on the other hand, the perception of difference persists
because of the continuance of ignorance and its cause, then
these teachers are themselves ignorant of the truth, and ,
they will be incapable of teaching the truth. ,

Further, as the preceptor has attained the knowledge of
the unitary self and thereby the ignorance concerning
Brahman and all the effects of such ignorance are thus
annihilated, there is no purpose in instructing the disciple.
If it is held that the preceptor and his knowledge are just in
the imagination of the disciple, the disciple and his knowledge
are similarly the product of the imagination of the
preceptor, and as such can not put an end to the
ignorance in question. If it is maintained that the disciple's
knowledge destroys ignorance etc., because it contradicts
the antecedent state of non-enlightenment, the same can
be asserted of the preceptor's knowledge. The futility of
such teachings is obvious. Enough of these unsound
doctrines which have all been refuted.

  
010 एकस्मिन् देहे वर्तमानस्य देहिनः कौमारावस्थां विहाय यौवनाद्यवस्थाप्राप्तौ आत्मनः स्थिरबुद्ध्या यथा आत्मा नष्ट इति न शोचति, देहाद् देहान्तरप्राप्तौ अपि तथा एव स्थिर आत्मा इति बुद्धिमान् न शोचति । अत आत्मनां नित्यत्वाद् आत्मानो न शोकस्थानम् । एतावद् अत्र कर्तव्यम् आत्मनां नित्यानाम् एव अनादिकर्मवश्यतया तत्तत्कर्मोचितदेहसंस्पृष्टानां तैरेव देहैः बन्धनिवृत्तये शास्त्रीयं स्ववर्णोचितं युद्धादिकम् अनभिसंहितफलं कर्म कुर्वताम् अवर्जनीयतया इन्द्रियैः इन्द्रियार्थस्पर्शाः शीतोष्णादिप्रयुक्तसुखदुःखदा भवन्ति, ते तु यावच्छास्त्रीयकर्मसमाप्ति क्षन्तव्या इति ।  
As the self is eternal, one does not grieve, thinking that
the self is lost, when an embodied self living in a body gives
up the state of childhood and attains youth and other states.
Similarly, the wise men, knowing that the self is eternal, do
not grieve, when the self attains a body different from the
present body. Hence the selves, being eternal, are not fit
objects for grief.
This much has to be done here; the eternal selves
because of Their being subject to beginningless Karma,
become endowed with bodies suited to Their Karmas. To
get rid of this bondage (of bodies), embodied beings perform
duties like war appropriate to their stations in life with
the help of the same bodies- in an attitude of detachment
from the fruits as prescribed by the scripture. Even to such
aspirants, contacts with sense-objects give pleasure and
pain, arising from cold, heat and such other things. But
these experiences are'to be endured till the acts enjoined in
the scriptures come to an end.
  
011 इमम् अर्थम् अनन्तरम् एव आह -शब्दस्पर्शरूपरसगन्धाः साश्रयाः तन्मात्राकार्यत्वात् मात्रा इति उच्यन्ते । श्रोत्रादिभिः तेषां स्पर्शाः शीतोष्णमृदुपरुषादिरूपसुखदुःखदा भवन्ति । शीतोष्णशब्दः प्रदर्शनार्थः; तान् धैर्येण यावद्युद्धादिशास्त्रीयकर्मसमाप्ति तितिक्षस्व । ते च आगमापायित्वाद् धैर्यवतां क्षन्तुं योग्याः । अनित्याः च एते बन्धहेतुभूतकर्मनाशे सति आगमापायित्वेन अपि निवर्तन्ते इत्यर्थः । 14 । The Lord explains the significance immediately afterwards:- As sound, touch, form, taste and smell with their bases,
are the effects of subtle elements (Tanmatras), they are called
Matras. The contact with these through the ear and
other senses gives rise to feelings of pleasure and pain, 
in the form of heat and cold, softness and hardness. The
words 'cold and heat' illustrate other sensations too.
Endure these with courage till you have discharged your
duties as prescribed by the scriptures. The brave must
endure them patiently, as they 'come and go'. They are
transient. When the Karmas, which cause bondage, are
destroyed, this 'coming and going' will end.
  
012 तत्क्षान्तिः किमर्था? इत्यत आह -यं पुरुषं धैर्ययुक्तम् अवर्जनीयदुःखं सुखवन्मन्यमानम् अमृतत्वसाधनतया स्ववर्णोचितं युद्धादिकर्म अनभिसंहितफलं कुर्वाणं तदन्तर्गताः शस्त्रपातादिमृदुक्रूरस्पर्शा न व्यथयन्ति स एव अमृतत्वं साधयति, न त्वादृशो दुःखासहिष्णुः इत्यर्थः । अतः आत्मनां नित्यत्वाद् एतावद् अत्र कर्तव्यम् इत्यर्थः । 15 । The Lord now explains the purpose of this endurance:-That person endowed with courage, who considers pain as inevitable as pleasure, and who performs war and such other acts suited to his station in life without attachment to the results and only as a means of attaining immortality - one whom the impact of weapons in war etc., which involve soft or harsh contacts, do not trouble, that person only attains immortality, not a person like you, who cannot bear grief. As the selves are immortal, what is to be done here, is this much only. This is the meaning.   
013 यत्तु आत्मनां नित्यत्वं देहानां स्वाभाविकं नाशित्वं च शोकानिमित्तम् उक्तम्'गतासूनगतासूंश्च नानुशोचन्ति पण्डिताः' (गीता 2।11) इति; तद् उपपादयितुम् आरभते -असतो देहस्य सद्भावो न विद्यते सतः च आत्मनो न असद्भावः । उभयोः देहात्मनोः उपलभ्यमानयोः यथोपलब्धि तत्त्वदर्शिभिः अन्तो दृष्टः । निर्णयान्तत्वात् निरूपणस्य निर्णय इह अन्तशब्देन उच्यते । देहस्य अचिद्वस्तुनः असत्त्वम् एव स्वरूपम्, आत्मनः चेतनस्य सत्त्वम् एव स्वरूपम् इति निर्णयो दृष्ट इत्यर्थः ।विनाशस्वभावो हि असत्त्वम्, अविनाशस्वभावश्च सत्त्वम् । यथा उक्तं भगवता पराशरेण 'तस्मान्न विज्ञानमृतेऽस्ति किंचित् क्वचित् कदाचिद् द्विज वस्तुजातम् ।' (वि0 पु0 2।12।43) 'सद्भाव एवं भवतो मयोक्तो ज्ञानं यथा सत्यमसत्यमन्यत्' (वि0 पु0 2।12।45) 'अनाशी परमार्थश्च प्राज्ञैरभ्युपगम्यते । तत्तु नाशि न संदेहो नाशिद्रव्योपपादितम् ।। (वि0 पु0 2।14।24) 'यत्तु कालान्तरेणापि नान्यां संज्ञामुपैति वै । परिणामादिसंभूतां तद्वस्तु नृप तच्च किम्' ।। (वि0 पु0 2।13।100) इति ।।अत्रापि 'अन्तवन्त इमे देहाः' (गीता 2।18) 'अविनाशि तु तद्विद्धि' (गीता 2।17) इति उच्यते । तदेव सत्त्वासत्त्वव्यपदेशहेतुः इति गम्यते । अत्र तु सत्कार्यवादस्य असङ्गतत्वात् न तत्परोऽयं श्लोकः ।  देहात्मस्वभावाज्ञानमोहितस्य तन्मोहशान्तये हि उभयोः नाशित्वानाशित्वरूपस्वभावविवेक एव वक्तव्यः । स एव 'गतासूनगतासूंश्च नानुशोचन्ति' (2।11) इति प्रस्तुतः । स एव 'अविनाशि तु तद्विद्धि' (2।17) 'अन्तवन्त इमे देहाः' (2।18) इत्यनन्तरम् उपपाद्यते; अतो यथोक्त एव अर्थः । 16 । Because of the immortality of the selves and the natural destructibility of the bodies, there is no cause for grief. It was told (previously): "The wise grive neither for the deadnor for the living" (2.11). Now the lord elucidates the same view.'The unreal,' that is, the body, can never come into being. 'The real,' that is, the self, can never cease to be. The finale about these, the body and the self, which can be experienced, has been realised correctly by the seers of the Truth. As analysis ends in conclusion, the term 'finale' is here used. The meaning is this: Non-existence (i.e., perishableness) is the real nature of the body which is in itself  insentient. Existence (i.e., imperishableness) Is the real nature of the self, which is sentient. [What follows is the justification of describing the body as 'unreal' and as having 'never come into being.']Non-existence has, indeed, the nature; of perishableness, and existence has the nature of imperishableness, as Bhagavan Parasara has said: 'O Brahmana, apart from conscious entity there does not exist any group of things anywhere and at any time. Thus have I taught you what is real existence - how conscious entity is real, and all else is unreal' (V.P.2.12.43-45). 'The Supreme Reality is considered asimperishable by the wise. There is no doubt that what can be obtained from a perishable substance is also perishable' (Ibid., 2.14.24). 'That entity which even by a change in time cannot come to possess a difference through modification etc., is real, What is that entity, O King? (It is the self who retains Its knowledge)' (Ibid., 2.13.100).It is said here also: 'These bodies are said to have an end' (2.18) and 'Know That (the Atman) to be indestructible' (2.17). It is seen from this that this (i.e., perishableness of the body and imperishableness of the self) is the reason for the designating the Atman as 'existence' (Sattva) and body as 'non-existence' (Asattva). This verse has no reference to the doctrine of Satkaryavada (i.e., the theory that effects are present in the cause), as such a theory has no relevance here. Arjuna is deluded about the true nature of the body and the self; so what ought to be taught to him in order to remove his delusion, is discrimination between these two - what is qualified by perishableness and what, by imperishableness. This (declaration) is introduced in thefollowing way: 'For the dead, or for the living' (2.11).Again this point is made clear immediately (by the words), 'Know that to be indestructible ' (2.17) and 'These bodies are said to have an end' (2.18).  
014 आत्मनः तु अविनाशित्वं कथम् उपपद्यते इति अत्र आह -तद् आत्मतत्त्वम् अविनाशि इति विद्धि, येन आत्मतत्त्वेन चेतनेन तद्व्यतिरिक्तम् इदम् अचेतनतत्त्वं सर्वं ततं व्याप्तम् । व्यापकत्वेन निरतिशयसूक्ष्मत्वाद् आत्मनो विनाशानर्हस्य तद्व्यतिरिक्तो न कश्चित् पदार्थो विनाशं कर्तुम् अर्हति, तद्व्याप्यतया तस्मात् स्थूलत्वात् । नाशकं हि शस्त्रं जलाग्निवाय्वादिकं नाश्यं व्याप्य शिथिलीकरोति । मुद्गरादयः अपि हि वेगवत्संयोगेन वायुम् उत्पाद्य तद्द्वारेण नाशयन्ति; अत आत्मतत्त्वम् अविनाशि । 17 । How the imperishableness of the self is to be understood, Sri Krshna now teaches :-Know that the self in its essential nature is imperishable.The whole of insentient matter, which is different (from the self), is pervaded by the self. Because of pervasiveness and extreme subtlety, the self cannot be destroyed; for every entity other than the self is capable of being pervaded by the self, and hence they are grosser than It. Destructiveagents like weapons, water, wind, fire etc., pervade the substances to be destroyed and disintegrate them. Even hammers and such other instruments rouse wind through violent contact with the objects and thereby destroy their objects, So, the essential nature of the self being subtler than anything else, It is imperishable.  
015 देहानां तु विनाशित्वम् एव स्वभावः इत्याह -'दिह उपचये' (धातुपाठे 1015) इति उपचयरूपा इमे देहा अन्तवन्तः विनाशस्वभावाः, उपचयात्मका हि घटादयः अन्तवन्तो दृष्टाः । नित्यस्य शरीरिणः कर्मफलभोगार्थतया भूतसंघातरूपा देहाः 'पुण्यः पुण्येन' (बृ0 उ0 4।4।5) इत्यादिशास्त्रैः उक्ताः कर्मावसानविनाशिनः । आत्मा तु अविनाशी, कुतः अप्रमेयत्वात् । न हि आत्मा प्रमेयतया उपलभ्यते, अपि तु प्रमातृतया । तथा च वक्ष्यते - 'एतद्यो वेत्ति तं प्राहुः क्षेत्रज्ञ इति तद्विदः ।।' (गीता 13।1) इति । न च अनेकोपचयात्मक आत्मा उपलभ्यते । सर्वत्र देहे 'अहम् इदं जानामि' इति देहाद् अन्यस्य प्रमातृतया एकरूपेण उपलब्धेः ।  न च देहादेः इव प्रदेशभेदे प्रमातुः आकारभेद उपलभ्यते, अत एकरूपत्वेन अनुपचयात्मकत्वात् प्रमातृत्वाद् व्यापकत्वात् च आत्मा नित्यः । देहः तु उपचयात्मकत्वात् शरीरिणः कर्मफलभोगार्थत्वाद् अनेकरूपत्वाद् व्याप्यत्वात् च विनाशी । तस्माद् देहस्य विनाशस्वभावत्वाद् आत्मनो नित्यस्वभावत्वात् च उभौ अपि न शोकस्थानम् इति शस्त्रपातादिपरुषस्पर्शान् अवर्जनीयान् स्वगतान् अन्यगतांश्च धैर्येण सोढ्वा अमृतत्वप्राप्तये अनभिसंहितफलं युद्धाख्यं कर्म आरभस्व । 18 । (The Lord) now says that the bodies are perishable :The root 'dih' means 'to grow.' Hence these bodies (Dehas) are characterised by complexity. They have an end - their nature is perishability. For, jugs and such other things which are characterised by complexity are seen to have an end. The bodies of the embodied self, which are made of conglomerated elements, serve the purpose ofexperiencing the effects of Karmas, as stated in (Brh.U.IV.4.5), 'Auspicious embodiments are got through good actions.' Such bodies perish when Karmas are exhausted. Further the self is imperishable. Why? Because it is not measurable. Neither can It be conceived as theobject of knowledge, but only as the subject (knower). It will be taught later on: 'He who knows It is called the knower of the Field by those who know this (13.1). Besides, the self is not seen to be made up of many (elements). Because in the perception 'I am the knower' throughout the body, only something other than the body is understood as possessing an invariable form as the knower. Further, this knower cannot be dismembered and seen in different places as is the case with the body. Therefore the self is eternal, For, (1) It is not a complex being of a single form; (2) It is the knowing subject; and (3) It pervades all. On the contrary, the body is perishable, because (1) it is complex; (2) it serves the purpose of experiencing the fruits of Karma by the embodied self; (3) it has a plurality of parts and (4) it can be pervaded. Therefore, as the body is by nature perishable and the self by nature is eternal, both are not objects fit for grief. Hence, bearing with courage the inevitable strike of weapons, sharp or hard, liable to be received by you and others, begin the action called war without being attached to the fruits but for the sake of attaining immortality.  
016 एनम् उक्तस्वभावम् आत्मानं प्रति हन्तारं हननहेतुकम् अपि यो मन्यते यः च एनं केन अपि हेतुना हतं मन्यते उभौ तौ न विजानीतः । उक्तैः हेतुभिः अस्य नित्यत्वाद् एव अयं हननहेतुः न भवति; अत एव च अयम् आत्मा न हन्यते । हन्तिधातुः अपि आत्मकर्मकः शरीरवियोगकरणवाची । 'न हिंस्यात् सर्वा भूतानि' 'ब्राह्मणो न हन्तव्यः' (क0 स्मृ0 8।2) इत्यादीनि अपि शास्त्राणि अविहितशरीरवियोगकरणविषयाणि ।।19 ।। With regard to "This" viz., the self, whose nature has been described above, he who thinks of It as the slayer, i.e., as the cause of slaying, and he who thinks 'This' (self) as slain by some cause or other - both of them do not know. As this self is eternal for the reasons mentioned above, no possible cause of destruction can slay It and for the same reason, It cannot be slain. Though the root 'han' (to slay) has the self for its object, it signifies causing the separation of the body from the self and not destruction of the self. Scriptural texts like 'You shall not cause injury to beings' and 'The Brahmana shall not be killed'? (K.Sm.8.2) indicate unsanctioned actions, causing separation of the body from the self. [In the above quotes, Slaughter in anethical sense is referred to, while the text refers to killing or separating the self from the body in a metaphysical sense. This is made explicit in the following verse].  
017 उक्तैः एव हेतुभिः नित्यत्वाद् अपरिणामित्वाद् आत्मनो जन्ममरणादयः सर्व एव अचेतनदेहधर्मा न सन्ति इति उच्यते । तत्र न जायते म्रियत इति वर्तमानयता सर्वेषु देहेषु सर्वैः अनुभूयमाने जन्ममरणे कदाचिद् अपि आत्मानं न स्पृशतः । नायं भूत्वा भविता वा न भूयः अयं कल्पादौ भूत्वा भूयः कल्पान्ते च न भविता इति न । केषुचित् प्रजापतिप्रभृतिदेहेषु आगमेन उपलभ्यमानं कल्पादौ जननं कल्पान्ते च मरणम् आत्मानं न स्पृशति इत्यर्थः । अतः सर्व देहगत आत्मा अजः अत एव नित्यः शाश्वतः प्रकृतिवदविशदसततपरिणामैः अपि न अन्वीयते। अतः पुराणः पुरातनः अपि नवः, सर्वदा अपूर्ववद् अनुभाव्य इत्यर्थः । अतः शरीरे हन्यमाने अपि न हन्यते अयम् आत्मा । 20 । As the self is eternal for the reasons mentioned (above), and hence free from modifications, it is said that all the attributes of the insentient (body) like birth, death etc., never touch the self. In this connection, as the statement, 'It is never born, It never dies' is in the present tense", it should be understood that the birth and death which are experienced by all in all bodies, do not touch the self. The statement 'Having come into being once, It never ceases to be' means that this self, having emerged at the beginning of a Kalpa (one aeon of manifestation) will not cease to be at the end of the Kalpa (i.e., will emerge again at the beginning of the next Kalpa unless It is liberated). This is the meaning -that birth at the beginning of a Kalpa in bodies such as those of Brahma and others, and death at the end of a Kalpa as stated in the scriptures, do not touch the self. Hence, the selves in all bodies, are unborn, and therefore eternal. It is abiding, not connected, like matter, with invisiblemodifications taking place. It is primeval; the meaningis that It existed from time immemorial; It is ever new i.e., It is capable of being experienced always as fresh. Therefore, when the body is slain the self is not slain.  
018 एवम् अविनाशित्वेन अजत्वेन व्ययानर्हत्वेन च नित्यम् एनम् आत्मानं यः पुरुषो वेद स पुरुषो देवमनुष्यतिर्यक्स्थावरशरीरावस्थितेषु आत्मसु कम् अपि आत्मानं कथं घातयति कं वा कथं हन्ति; कथं नाशयति कथं वा तत्प्रयोजको भवति इत्यर्थः । एतान् आत्मनो घातयामि हन्मि इति अनुशोचनम् आत्मस्वरूपयाथात्म्याज्ञानमूलम् एव इत्यभिप्रायः ।। 21 ।।  He who knows the self to be eternal, as It is indestructible, unborn and changeless - how can that person be said to cause the death of the self, be it of the self existing in the bodies of gods or animals or immovables? Whom does he kill? The meaning is - how can he destroy anyone or cause anyone to slay? How does he become an instrument for slaying? The meaning is this: the feeling of sorrow: 'I cause the slaying of these selves, I slay these,' has its basis solely in ignorance about the true nature of the self.   
019 य़द्यपि नित्यानाम् आत्मनां शरीरविश्लेषमात्रं क्रियते, तथापि रमणीयभोगसाधनेषु शरीरेषु नश्यत्सु तद्वियोगरूपं शोकनिमित्तम् अस्ति एव, इति अत आह -धर्मयुद्धे शरीरं त्यजतां त्यक्त्तशरीराद् अधिकतरकल्याणशरीरग्रहणम् शास्त्राद् अवगम्यते इति । जीर्णानि वासंासि विहाय नवानि कल्याणानि वासांसि गृह्णन्तम् इव हर्षनिमित्तम् एव अत्र उपलभ्यते ।। 22 ।।  Let it be granted that what is done is only separation of the bodies from the eternal selves. Even then, when the bodies, which are instruments for the experience of agreeable pleasures, perish, there still exists reason for sorrow in their separation from the bodies. To this (Sri Krshna) replies:That those who give up their bodies in a righteous war get more beauteous bodies than before, is known through the scriptures. Casting off worn-out garments and taking new and beautiful ones, can be only a cause of joy, as seen here in the world in the case of new garments.  
020 पुनरपि 'अविनाशि तु तद्विद्धि येन सर्वमिदं ततम् '। (गीता 2।17)  इति पूर्वोक्तम् अविनाशित्वं सुखग्रहणाय व्यञ्जयन् द्रढयति -शस्त्राग्न्यम्बुवायवः छेदनदहनक्लेदनशोषणानि आत्मानं प्रति कर्तुंं न शक्नुवन्ति । सर्वगतत्वाद् आत्मनः सर्वतत्त्वव्यापकस्वभावतया सर्वेभ्यः तत्त्वेभ्यः सूक्ष्मत्वात् अस्य तैः व्याप्त्यनर्हत्वाद् व्याप्यकर्तव्यत्वात् च छेदनदहनक्लेदनशोषणानाम् । अत आत्मा नित्यः स्थाणुः अचलः अयं सनातनः स्थिरस्वभावः अप्रकम्प्यः पुरातनः च ।। 23-24 ।। Once again Sri Krshna emphasises for easy understanding the indestructibility of the self, taught before: 'Know that to be indestructible by which all this is pervaded' (11.17) and confirms it thus:Weapons, fire, water and air are incapable of cleaving, burning, wetting and drying the self; for, the nature of the self is to pervade all elements; It is present everywhere; for, It is subtler than all the elements; It is not capable of being pervaded by them; and cleaving, burning, wetting and drying are actions which can take place only by pervading a substance. Therefore the self is eternal. It is stable, immovable and primeval. The meaning is that It is unchanging, unshakable and ancient.  
021 छेदनादियोग्यानि वस्तूनि यैः प्रमाणैः व्यज्यन्ते तैः अयम् आत्मा न व्यज्यते इति अव्यक्तः । अतः छेद्यादिविजातीयः । अचिन्त्यः च सर्ववस्तुविजातीयत्वेन तत्तत्स्वभावयुक्तया चिन्तयितुम् अपि न अर्हः । अतः च अविकार्यः विकारानर्हः । तस्माद् उक्त्तलक्षणम् एनम् आत्मानं विदित्वा तत्कृते न अनुशोचितुम् अर्हसि ।। 25 ।। The self is not made manifest by those Pramanas (means of knowledge) by which objects susceptible of being cleft etc., are made manifest; hence It is unmanifest, being different in kind from objects susceptible to cleaving etc., It is inconceivable, being different in kind from all objects. As It does not possess the essential nature of any of them, It cannot even be conceived. Therefore, It is unchanging, incapable of modifications. So knowing this self to be possessed of the above mentioned qualities, it does not become you to feel grief for Its sake.  
022 अथ नित्यजातंंं नित्यमृतं देहम् एव एनम् आत्मानं मनुषे न देहातिरिक्तम् उक्तलक्षणं तथापि एवम् अतिमात्रं शोचितुं न अर्हसि । परिणामस्वभावस्य देहस्य उत्पत्तिविनाशयोः अवर्जनीयत्वात् ।। 26 ।। Besides, if you consider this self as identicl with the body, which is constantly born and constantly dies - whlch is nothing other than these characteristics of the body mentioned above, even then it does not become you to feel grief; because, birth and death are inevitable for the body, whose nature is modification.  
023 उत्पन्नस्य विनाशो ध्रुवः अवर्जनीय उपलभ्यते । तथा विनष्टस्य अपि जन्म अवर्जनीयम् । कथम् इदम् उपलभ्यते विनष्टस्य उत्पत्तिः इति । सत एव उत्पत्त्युपलब्धेः, असतः च अनुपलब्धेः । उत्पत्तिविनाशादयः सतो द्रव्यस्यअवस्थाविशेषाः । तन्तुप्रभृतीनि द्रव्याणि सन्ति एव रचनाविशेषयुक्तानि पटादीनि उच्यन्ते । अस्मत्कार्यवादिना अपि एतावद् एव उपलभ्यते । न हि तत्र तन्तुसंस्थान विशेषातिरेकेण द्रव्यान्तरं प्रतीयते । कारकव्यापारनामान्तरभजनव्यवहारविशेषाणाम् एतावता एव उपपत्तेः, न च द्रव्यान्तरकल्पनायुक्ता । अत उत्पत्तिविनाशादयः सतो द्रव्यस्य अवस्थाविशेषाः । उत्पत्त्याख्याम् अवस्थाम्  उपयातस्य द्रव्यस्य तद्विरोध्यवस्थान्तरप्राप्तिः विनाश इति उच्यते । मृद्द्रव्यस्य पिण्डत्वघटत्वकपालत्वचूर्णत्वादिवत् परिणामिद्रव्यस्य परिणामपरम्परा अवर्जनीया । तत्र पूर्वावस्थस्य द्रव्यस्य उत्तरावस्थाप्राप्तिः विनाशः ; सा एव  तदवस्थस्य उत्पत्तिः ।  एवम् उत्पत्तिविनाशाख्यपरिणामपरम्परा परिणामिनो द्रव्यस्य अपरिहार्या इति न तत्र शोचितुम् अर्हसि ।। 27 ।। For what has originated, destruction is certain - it is seen to be inevitable, Similarly what has perished will inevitably originate, How should this be understood - that there is origination for that (entity) which has perished? It is seen that an existing entity only can originate and not a non-existent one. Origination, annihilation etc, , are merely particularstates of an existent entity.Now thread etc., do really exist. When arranged in a particular way, they are called clothes etc. It is seen that even those who uphold the doctrine that the effect is a new entity (Asatkarya-vadins) will admit this much that no new entity over and above the particular arrangement of threads is seen. It is not tenable to hold that this is the coming intobeing of a new entity, since, by the process of manufacture there is only attainment of a new name and special functions. No new entity emerges.Origination, annihilation etc., are thus particular stages of an existent entity. With regard to an entity which has entered into a stage known as origination, its entry into the opposite condition is called annihilation. Of an evolving entity, a sequence of evolutionary stages is inevitable. For instance, clay becomes a lump, jug, a potsherd, and (finally) powder. Here, what is called annihilation is the attainment of a succeeding stage by an entity which existed previously in a preceding stage. And this annihilation itself is called birth in that stage. Thus, the sequence called birth and annihilation being inevitable for an evolving entity, it is not worthy of you to grieve.  
024 सत्तो द्रव्यस्य पूर्वावस्थाविरोध्यवस्थान्तरप्राप्तिदर्शनेन यः अल्पीयान् शोकः सोऽपिमनुष्यादिभूतेषु न संभवति इत्याह -मनुष्यादि भूतानि सन्ति एव द्रव्याणि अनुपलब्धपूर्वावस्थानि  उपलब्धमनुष्यत्वादि-मध्यमावस्थानि अनुपलब्धोत्तरावस्थानि स्वेषु स्वभावेषु वर्तन्ते इति न तत्र परिदेवनानिमित्तम् अस्ति ।। 28 ।।  Now Sri Krshna says that not even the slightest grief arising from seeingan entity passing from a previous existing stage to an opposite stage, is justifiable in regard to human beings etc.Human beings etc., (i.e., bodies) exist as entities; their previous stages are unknown, their middle stages in the form of man etc., are known, and their (final) and future stages are unknown. As they thus exist in their own natural stages, there is no cause for grief.   
025 एवं शरीरात्मवादे  अपि नास्ति शोकनिमित्तम् इति उक्त्वा शरीरातिरिक्त आश्चर्यस्वरूप आत्मनि द्रष्टा वक्ता श्रोता श्रवणायत्तात्मनिश्चयः च दुर्लभ इत्याह -एवम् उक्तस्वभावं स्वेतरसमस्तवस्तुविसजातीयतया आश्चर्यवद् अवस्थितम् अनन्तेषु जन्तुषु महता तपसा क्षीणपाप उपचितपुण्यः कश्चित् पश्यति तथाविधः कश्चित् परस्मै वदति एवं कश्चिद् एव शृणोति श्रुत्वा अपि एनं य़थावद् अवस्थितं तत्त्वतो न कश्चिद् वेद । चकाराद् द्रष्टृवक्तृश्रोतृषु अपि तत्त्वतो दर्शनं तत्त्वतो वचनं तत्त्वतः श्रवणं दुर्लभम् इति उक्तं भवति ।। 29 ।। After thus saying that there is no cause for grief even according to the view which identifies the body with the self, Sri Krshna proceeds to say that it is hard to find one who can be said to have truly perceived the Atman or spoken about It or heard about It or gained a true conception of It by hearing. For the Atman, which is actually different from the body, is of a wonderful nature.Among innumerable beings, someone, who by great austerity has got rid of sins and has increased his merits, realises this self possessing the above-mentioned nature, which is wonderful and distinct in kind from all things other than Itself. Such a one speaks of It to another. Thus, someone hears of It. And even after hearing of It, no one knows It exactly that It really exists. The term 'ca' (and) implies that even amongst the seers, the speakers and hearers, one with authentic perception, authentic speech and authentic hearing, is a rarity.  
026 सर्वस्य देवादिदेहिनो देहे वध्यमाने अपि अयं देही नित्यम् अवध्य इति मन्तव्यः । तस्मात् सर्वाणि देवादिस्थावरान्तानि भूतानि विषमाकाराणि अपि उक्तेन स्वभावेन स्वरूपतः समानानि नित्यानि च । देहगतं तु वैषम्यम् अनित्यत्वं च । ततो देवादीनि सर्वाणि भूतानि उद्दिश्य न शोचितुम् अर्हसि न केवलं भीष्मादीन् प्रति ।। 30 ।। The self within the body Of everyone such as gods etc., must be considered to be eternally imperishable, though the body can be killed. Therefore, all beings from gods to immovable beings, even though they possess different forms, are all uniform and eternal in their nature asdescribed above. The inequality and the perishableness pertain only to the bodies. Therefore, it is not fit for you to feel grief for any of the beings beginning from gods etc., and not merely for Bhishma and such others.  
027 अपि च इदं प्रारब्धं युद्धं प्राणिमारणम् अपि अग्निषोमीयादिवत् स्वधर्मम् अवेक्ष्य न विकम्पितुम् अर्हसि धर्म्यात् न्यायतः प्रवृत्तात् युद्धाद् अन्यत् न हि क्षत्रियस्य श्रेयो विद्यते । 'शौर्यं तेजो धृतिर्दाक्ष्यं युद्धे चाप्यपलायनम् । दानमीश्वरभावश्च क्षात्रं कर्म स्वभावजम्' ।। (गीता 18।43) इति हि वक्ष्यते । अग्निषोमीयादीषु च न  हिंसा पशो निहीनतरच्छागादिदेहपरित्यागपूर्वककल्याणदेह-स्वर्गादिप्रापकत्वश्रुतेः संज्ञपनस्य । 'न वा उ वेतन्म्रियसे न रिष्यसि देवाँ इदेषि पथिभिः सुगेभिः । यत्र यन्ति सुकृतो नापि दुष्कृतस्तत्र त्वा देवः सविता दधातु' (यजुर्वेद 4।6।9।43) इति हि श्रूयते । इह च युद्धे मृतानां कल्याणतरदेहादिप्राप्तिः उक्ता 'वासांसि जीर्णानि' (गीता 2।22) इत्यादिना । अतः चिकित्सककर्म आतुरस्य इव अस्य रक्षणम् एव अग्निषोमीयादिषु संज्ञपनम् ।। 31 ।। Further, even though there is killing of life in this war which has begun, it is not fit for you to waver, considering your own duty, as in the Agnisomiya and other sacrifices involving slaughter. To a Kshatriya, there is no greater good than a righteous war, begun for a just cause. It will be declared in the Gita: 'Valour, non-defeat (by the enemies),fortitude, adroitness and also not fleeing from battle, generosity, lordliness - these are the duties of the Kshatriya born of his very nature.' (18.43).In Agnisomiya etc., no injury is caused to the animal to be immolated; for, according to the Vedic Text, the victim, a he-goat, after abandoning an inferior body, will attain heaven etc., with a beautiful body. The Text pertaining to immolation declares: 'O animal, by this (immolation) youwill never die, you are not destroyed. You will pass through happy paths to the realm of the gods, where the virtuous only reach and not the sinful. May the god Savitr give you a proper place.' (Yaj., 4.6.9.46). Likewise the attainment of more beautiful bodies by those who die here in this war has been declared in the Gita, 'As a man casts off worn-out garments and takes others that are new...'(2.22). Hence, just as lancing and such other operations of a surgeon are for curing a patient, the immolation of the sacrificial animal in the Agnisomiya etc., is only for its good.  
028 अयत्नोपनतम् इदं निरतिशयसुखोपायभूतं निर्विघ्नम् ईदृशं युद्धं सुखिनः पुण्यवन्तः क्षत्रिया लभन्ते ।। 32 ।। Only the fortunate Kshatriyas, i.e., the meritorious ones, gain such a war as this, which has come unsought, which is the means for the attainmentof immeasurable bliss, and which gives an unobstructed pathway to heaven.  
029 अथ क्षत्रियस्य स्वधर्मभूतम् इमम् आरब्धं संग्रामं मोहाद् न करिष्यसि चेत् ततः प्रारब्धस्य धर्मस्याकरणात् स्वधर्मफलं निरतिशयसुखं विजयेन निरतिशयां कीर्तिं च हित्वा पापं निरतिशयम् अवाप्स्यसि ।। 33 ।। If in delusion, you do not wage this war, which has started and which is the duty of a Kshatriya, then, owing to the non-performance of your immediate and incumbent duty, you will lose the immeasurable bliss which is the fruit of discharging your duty and the immeasurable famewhich is the fruit of victory. In addition, you will incur extreme sin.  
030 न केवलं निरतिशयसुखकीर्तिहानिमात्रं पार्थो युद्धे प्रारब्धे पलायित इति अव्ययां सर्वदेशकालव्यापिनीम् अकीर्तिं च समर्थानि असमर्थानि सर्वाणि भूतानि कथयिष्यन्ति ततः किमिति चेत्, शौर्यवीर्यपराक्रमादिभिः सर्वसंभावितस्य तद्विपर्ययजा हि अकीर्तिः मरणाद् अतिरिच्यते । एवंविधाया अकीर्तेः मरणम् एव तव श्रेयः इत्यर्थः ।। 34 ।। You will then incur not merely the loss of all happiness and honour but will be the object of disrespect by all people, the qualified and even the unqualified, for all time. They will ridicule you saying, 'When the battle began, Arjuna ran away.' If it be asked, 'What if it be so?", the reply is: 'To one who is honoured by all for courage, prowess, valour, etc., this kind of dishonour arising from the reverse of these attributes, is worse than death? The meaning is that death itself would be better for you than this kind of dishonour.   
031 बन्धुस्नेहात् कारुण्याच्च युद्धात् निवृत्तस्य शूरस्य मम अकीर्तिः कथम् आगमिष्यति इतिअत्राह -येषां कर्णदुर्योधनादीनां महारथानाम् इतः पूर्वं त्वं शूरो वैरी इति बहुमतो भूत्वा इदानीं युद्धे समुपस्थिते निवृत्तव्यापारतया लाघवं सुग्रहतां यास्यसि। ते महारथाः त्वां भयाद् युद्धाद् उपरतं मंस्यन्ते । शूराणां हि वैरिणां शत्रुभयाद् ऋते बन्धुस्नेहादिना युद्धाद् उपरतिः न उपपद्यते ।। 35 ।। If it is said, 'How could dishonour accrue to me, who am a hero, but have withdrawn from the battle only out of love and compassion for my relatives?' the reply is as follows:Great warriors like Karna, Duryodhana, etc., hitherto held you in high esteem as a heroic enemy. Now by refraining from battle when it has begun, you will appear to them as despicable and easily defeatable. These great warriors will think of you as withdrawing from battle out of fear. Because turning away from battle does not happen in the case of brave enemies through affection etc., for relatives. It can happen only through fear of enemies.  
032 किं च -शूराणाम् अस्माकं सन्निधौ कथम् अयं पार्थः क्षणम् अपि स्थातुं शक्नुयाद् अस्मत्संनिधानाद् अन्यत्र हि अस्य सामर्थ्यम् इति तव सामर्थ्यं निन्दन्तः शूराणाम् अग्रे अवाच्यवादान् च बहून् वदिष्यन्ति तव अहिताः शत्रवो धार्तराष्ट्राः ततः अधिकतरं दुःखं किं तव? एवंविधावाच्यश्रवणात् मरणम् एव श्रेयः, इति त्वम् एव मन्यसे ।। 36 ।। Moreover, your enemies, the sons of Dhrtarashtra, will make many remarks unutterably slanderous and disparaging to heroes, saying, 'How can this partha stand in the presence of us, who are heroes, even for a moment? His prowess is elsewhere than in our presence.' Can there be anything more painful to you than this? You yourself will understand that death is preferable to subjection to disparagement of this kind.  
033 अतः शूरस्य आत्मना परेषां हननम् आत्मनो वा परैः हननम् उभयम् अपि श्रेयसे भवतिइति आह -धर्मयुद्धे परैः हतः चेत् तत एव परमनिः श्रेयसं प्राप्स्यसि; परान् वा हत्वा अकण्टकं राज्यं भोक्ष्यसे । अनभिसंहितफलस्य युद्धाख्यस्य धर्मस्य परमनिःश्रेयसोपायत्वात्, तत् च परमनिःश्रेयसं प्राप्यसि । तस्माद् युद्धाय उद्योगः परमपुरुषार्थलक्षणमोक्षसाधनम् इति निश्चित्य तदर्थम् उत्तिष्ठ । कुन्तीपुत्रस्य तव एतद् एव युक्तम् इत्यभिप्रायः ।। 37 ।।  Sri Krshna now says that for a hero, enemies being slain by oneself and oneself being slain by enemies are both conducive to supreme bliss.If you are slain in a righteous war by enemies, you shall thereby attain supreme bliss. Or, slaying the enemies, you shall enjoy this kingdom without obstacles. As the duty called war, when done without attachment to the fruits, becomes the means for winning supreme bliss, you will attain that supreme bliss. Therefore, arise, assured that engagement in war (here the duty) is the means for attaining release, which is known as man's supreme goal. This alone is suitable for you, the son of Kunti. This is the purport.   
034 मुमुक्षोः युद्धानुष्ठानप्रकारम् आह -एवं देहातिरिक्तम् अस्पृष्टसमस्तदेहस्वभावं नित्यम् आत्मानं ज्ञात्वा 'युद्धे च अवर्जनीयशस्त्रपातादिनिमित्तसुखदुःखार्थलाभालाभजयपराजयेषु अविकृतबुद्धिःस्वर्गादिफलाभिसन्धिरहितः केवलकार्यबुद्ध्या युद्धम् आरभस्व । एवं कुर्वाणो न पापम् अवाप्स्यसि पापं दुःखरूपं संसारं न अवाप्स्यसि । संसारबन्धात् मोक्ष्यसे इत्यर्थः । 38 । Sri Krshna then explains to the aspirant for liberation how to conduct oneself in war.Thus, knowing the self to be eternal, different from the body and untouched by all corporeal qualities, remaining unaffected by pleasure and pain resulting from the weapon-strokes etc., inevitable in a war, as also by gain and loss of wealth, victory and defeat, and keeping yourself free from attachment to heaven and such other fruits, begin the battle considering it merely as your own duty. Thus, you will incur no sin. Here sin means transmigratory existence which is misery. The purport is that you will be liberated from the bondage of transmigratory existence.  
035 एवम् आत्मयाथात्म्यज्ञानम् उपदिश्य तत्पूर्वकं मोक्षसाधनभूतं कर्मयोगं वक्तुम् आरभते -संख्या बुद्धिः, बुद्ध्यावधारणीयम् आत्मतत्त्वं सांख्यम् । ज्ञातव्ये आत्मतत्त्वे तज्ज्ञानाय या बुद्धिः अभिधेया 'न त्वेवाहम्' (गीता 2।12) इत्यारभ्य 'तस्मात् सर्वाणि भूतानि' (गीता 2।30) इत्यन्तेन, सा एषा अभिहिता ।आत्मज्ञानपूर्वकमोक्षसाधनभूतकर्मानुष्ठाने यो बुद्धियोगो वक्तव्यः, स इह योगशब्देन उच्यते 'दूरेण ह्यवरं कर्म बुद्धियोगात्' (गीता 2।49) इति हि वक्ष्यते । तत्र योगे या बुद्धिः वक्तव्या ताम् इमाम् अभिधीयमानां शृणु यया बुद्ध्या युक्तः कर्मबन्धं प्रहास्यसि । कर्मणा बन्धः, संसारबन्ध इत्यर्थः । 39 । Thus, after teaching the knowledge of the real nature of the self, Sri Krshna begins to expound the Yoga of work, which, when preceded by it (i.e., knowledge of the self), constitutes the means for liberation.'Sankhya' means 'intellect', and the truth about the Atman, which is determinable by the intellect, is 'Sankhyam'. Concerning the nature of the self which has to be known, whatever Buddhi has to be taught, has been taught to you in the passage beginning with, 'It is not that I did not exist' (11.12) and ending with the words, 'Therefore, 'you shall not grieve for any being' (11.30). The disposition of mind (Buddhi) which is required for the performance of works preceded by knowledge of the self and which thus constitutes the means of attaining release, that is here called by the term Yoga. It will be clearly told later on, 'Work done with desire for fruits is far inferior to work done with evenness of mind' (11.49). What Buddhi or attitude of mind is required for making your act deserve the name of Yoga, listen to it now. Endowed with that knowledge; you will be able to cast away the bondage of Karma.'Karma-bandha' means the bondage due to Karma i.e., the bondage of Samsara.   
036 वक्ष्यमाणबुद्धियुक्तस्य कर्मणो माहात्म्यम् आह -इह कर्मयोगे न अभिक्रमनाशः अस्ति । अभिक्रम आरम्भः नाशः फलसाधनभावनाशः । आरब्धस्य असमाप्तस्य विच्छिन्नस्य अपि न निष्फलत्वम् । आरब्धस्य विच्छेदे प्रत्यवायः अपि न विद्यते । अस्य कर्मयोगाख्यस्य स्वधर्मस्य स्वल्पांशः अपि महतो भयात् संसारभयात् त्रायते । अयम् अर्थः - 'पार्थ नैवेह नामुत्र विनाशस्तस्य विद्यते' । (गीता 6।40) इति उत्तरत्र प्रपञ्चयिष्यते । अन्यानि हि लौकिकानि वैदिकानि च साधनानि विच्छिन्नानि न हि फलप्रसवाय भवन्ति प्रत्यवायाय च भवन्ति । 40 । Now Sri Krshna explains the glory of works associated with the Buddhi to be described hereafter:Here, in Karma Yoga, there is no loss of 'Abhikrama' or of effort that has been put in; 'loss' means the loss of efficacy to bring about the fruits. In Karma Yoga if work is begun and left unfinished, and the continuity is broken in the middle, it does not remain fruitless, as in the case ofworks undertaken for their fruits. No evil result is acquired if the continuity of work is broken. Even a little of this Dharma known as Karma Yoga or NishkamaKarma (unselfish action without desire for any reward) gives protection from the great fear, i.e., the fear of transmigratory existence. The same purport is explained later thus: 'Neither in this world nor the next, O Arjuna, there is annihilation for him' (6.40). But in works, Vedic and secular, when there is interruption in the middle, not only do they not yield fruits, but also there is accrual of evil.  
037 काम्यकर्मविषयाया बुद्धेः मोक्षसाधनभूतकर्मविषयां बुद्धिं विशिनष्टि -इह शास्त्रीये सर्वस्मिन् कर्मणि व्यवसायात्मिका बुद्धिः एका । मुमुक्षुणा अनुष्ठेये कर्मणि बुद्धिः व्यवसायात्मिका बुद्धिः । व्यवसायो निश्चयः, सा हि बुद्धिः आत्मयाथात्म्यनिश्चय-पूर्विका । काम्यकर्मविषया तु बुद्धिः अव्यवसायात्मिका । तत्र हि कामाधिकारे देहाद् अतिरिक्तात्मास्तित्वमात्रम् अपेक्षितम्, न आत्मस्वरूपयाथात्म्यनिश्चयः, स्वरूपयाथात्म्यानिश्चये अपि स्वर्गादिफलार्थित्वतत्साधनानुष्ठानतत्फलानुभवानां संभवाद् अविरोधाच्च । सा इयं व्यवसायात्मिका बुद्धिः एकफलसाधननिषयतया एका । एकस्मै मोक्षफलाय हि मुमुक्षोः सर्वाणि कर्माणि विधीयन्ते । अतः शास्त्रार्थस्य एकत्वात् सर्वकर्मविषया बुद्धिः एका एव । यथा एकफलसाधनतया आग्नेयादीनां षण्णां सेतिकर्तव्यताकानाम् एकशास्त्रार्थतया तद्विषया बुद्धिः एका, तद्वत् इत्यर्थः । अव्यवसायिनां तु स्वर्गपुत्रपश्वन्नादिफलसाधनकर्माधिकृतानां बुद्धयः फलानन्त्याद् अनन्ताः, तत्रापि बहुशाखाः । एकस्मै फलाय चोदिते अपि दर्शपूर्णमासादौ कर्मणि 'आयुराशास्ते सुप्रजास्त्वमाशास्ते' इत्याद्यवगतावान्तरफलभेदेन बहुशाखात्वं च विद्यते । अतः अव्यवसायिनां बुद्धयः अनन्ता बहुशाखाश्च ।एतद् उक्तं भवति - नित्येषु नैमित्तिकेषु कर्मसु प्रधानफलानि अवान्तरफलानि च यानि श्रूयमाणानि तानि सर्वाणि परित्यज्य मोक्षैकफलतया सर्वाणि कर्माणि एकशास्त्रार्थतया अनुष्ठेयानि । काम्यानि च स्ववर्णाश्रमोचितानि तत्तत्फलानि परित्यज्य मोक्षफलसाधनतयानित्यनैमित्तिकैः एकीकृत्य यथाबलम् अनुष्ठेयानि इति । 41 । Now, Sri Krshna distinguishes the Buddhi or mental disposition concerned with those acts which constitute a means for attaining release from those which are concerned with the acts meant for gaining the desired objects:Here, i.e., in every ritual sanctioned by the scriptures, the Buddhi or disposition of mind marked by resolution, is single. The Buddhi marked by resolution is the Buddhi concerned with acts which must be performed by one desirous of release (and not any kind of work). The term 'Vyavasaya' means unshakable conviction: this Buddhi (disposition of mind) comes out of prior determination about the true nature of the self. But the Buddhi concerning the performance of rituals to fulfill certain desires, is marked by irresolution; because here only thismuch knowledge of the self is sufficient - 'the self (as an entity) exists differently from the body. 'Such a general understanding is sufficient to qualify for performing acts giving fulfilment of certain desires. It does not require any definite knowledge about the true nature of the self. For, even if there is no such knowledge, desires for heaven etc., can arise, the means for their attainment can be adopted, and the experience of those fruits can take place. For this reason there is no contradiction in the teaching of the scriptures. [The contradiction negated here is how can the same scriptural acts produce different results - fulfilment of desires and liberation.The difference in the disposition of the mind accounts for it.]The Buddhi (mental disposition) marked by resolution has a single aim, because it relates to the attainment of a single fruit. For, as far as one desiring release is concerned, all acts are enjoined only for the accomplishment of that single fruit. Therefore, since the purpose of the scriptures here is one only (i.e, liberation), the Buddhi regarding allrituals taught in the scriptures too is only one, as far as liberation-seekers are concerned. For example, the set of six sacrifices, beginning with Agneya with all their subsidiary processes (though enjoined in different passages) forms the subject of a single injunction, as they are all for the attainment of a single fruit. Consequently the Buddhi concerning these is one only. The meaning of the verse under discussion must be construed in the same manner. But the Buddhi of the irresolute ones who are engaged in rituals for winning such fruits as heaven, sons, cattle, food etc., are endless, fruits being endless. In rituals like Darsapurnamasa (new moon and full moon sacrifice), even though attainment of a single fruit (heaven) is enjoined; there accrues to these the character of having many branches on account of the mention of many secondary fruits as evidenced by such passages as, 'He desires a long life.' Therefore the Buddhi of irresolute ones has many branches and are endless.The purport is: In performing obligatory and occasional rituals, all fruits, primary and secondary, promised in the scriptures, should be abandoned, with the idea that release or salvation is the only purpose of all scripture - ordained rituals. These rituals should be performed without any thought of selfish gains: In addition, acts motivated by desires (kamya-karmas) also should be performed according to one's own capacity; after abandoning all desire for fruits and with the conviction that they also, when 'performed' in that way, form the means for attainment of release. They should be looked upon as equal to obligatory and occasional rites suited to one's own station and stages in life.  
038 अथ काम्यकर्माधिकृतान् निन्दति -याम् इमां पुष्पितां पुष्पमात्रफलाम् आपातरमणीयां वाचम् अविपश्चितः अल्पज्ञा भोगैश्वर्यगतिं प्रति वर्तमानां प्रवदन्ति, वेदवादरताः वेदेषु ये स्वर्गादिफलवादाः तेषु सक्ताः न अन्यद् अस्ति इति वादिनः तत्सङ्गातिरेकेण स्वर्गादेः अधिकं फलं  न अन्यद् अस्ति इति वदन्तः । कामात्मानः कामप्रवणमनसः स्वर्गपराः स्वर्गपरायणाः स्वर्गादिफलावसाने पुनर्जन्मकर्माख्यफलप्रदां क्रियाविशेषबहुलां तत्त्वज्ञानरहिततया क्रियाविशेषप्रचुरां तेषां भोगैश्वर्यगतिं प्रति वर्तमानां याम् इमां वाचं ये प्रवदन्ति इति सम्बन्धः । 42-43। Sri Krshna condemns those who perform acts for the attainment of objects of desire:The ignorant, whose knowledge is little, and who have as their sole aim the attainment of enjoyment and power, speak the flowery language i.e., having its flowers (show) only as fruits, which look apparently beautiful at first sight. They rejoice in the letter of the Vedas i.e., they are attached to heaven and such other results (promised in the Karma-kanda of the Vedas). They say that there is nothing else, owing to their intense attachment to these results. They say that there is no fruit superior to heaven etc. They are full of worldly desires and their minds are highlyattached to secular desires. They hanker for heaven, i.e., think of the enjoyment, of the felicities of heaven, after which one can again have rebirth which offers again the opportunity to perform varied rites devoidof true knowledge and leads towards the attainment of enjoyments andpower once again.With regard to those who cling to pleasure and power and whose understanding is contaminated by that flowery speech relating to pleasure and lordly powers, the aforesaid mental disposition characterised by resolution, will not arise in their Samadhi. Samadhi here means the mind. The knowledge of the self will not arise in such minds. In theminds of these persons, there cannot arise the mental disposition that looks on all Vedic rituals as means for liberation based on the determined conviction about the real form of the self. Hence, in an aspirant for liberation, there should be no attachment to rituals out of the conviction that they are meant for the acquisition of objects of desire only.  
039 तेषां भोगैश्वर्यप्रसक्तानां तया वाचा भोगैश्वर्यविषयया अपहृतात्मज्ञानानां यथोदिता व्यवसायात्मिका बुद्धिः समाधौ मनसि न विधीयते, न उत्पद्यते । समाधीयते अस्मिन् आत्मज्ञानम् इति समाधिः मनः । तेषां मनसि आत्मयाथात्म्यनिश्चयज्ञानपूर्वमोक्षसाधनभूत-कर्मविषया बुद्धिः कदाचिद् अपि न उत्पद्यते इत्यर्थः । अतः काम्येषु कर्मसु मुमुक्षुणा न सङ्गः कर्तव्यः । 44 । extra!  
040 एवम् अत्यन्ताल्पफलानि पुनर्जन्मप्रसवानि कर्माणि मातापितृसहसेभ्यः अपि वत्सलतरतया आत्मोपजीवने प्रवृत्ता वेदाः किमर्थं वदन्ति कथं वा वेदोदितानि त्याज्यतया उच्यन्ते इति अत्र आह -त्रयो गुणाः त्रैगुण्यं सत्त्वरजस्तमांसि; सत्त्वरजस्तमःप्रचुराः पुरुषाः त्रैगुण्यशब्देन उच्यन्ते । तद्विषया वेदाः, तमः प्रचुराणां रजः प्रचुराणां सत्त्वप्रचुराणां च वत्सलतरतया एव हितम् अवबोधयन्ति वेदाः ।यदि एषां स्वगुणानुगुण्येन स्वर्गादिसाधनम् एव हितं न अवबोधयन्ति, तदा एव ते रजस्तमःप्रचुरतया सात्त्विकफलमोक्षविमुखाः स्वापेक्षितफलसाधनम् अजानन्तः कामप्रावण्यविवशा अनुपायेषु उपायभ्रान्त्या प्रविष्टाः प्रणष्टा भवेयुः । अतः त्रैगुण्यविषया वेदाः, त्वं तु निस्त्रैगुण्यो भव, इदानीं सत्त्वप्रचुरः त्वं तदेव वर्धय, नान्योन्यसंकीर्णगुणत्रयप्रचुरो भव । न तत्प्राचुर्यं वर्धय इत्यर्थः । निर्द्वन्द्वः निर्गतसकलसांसारिकस्वभावः । नित्यसत्त्वस्थः गुणद्वयरहितनित्यप्रवृद्धसत्त्वस्थो भव । कथम्? इति चेत्, निर्योगक्षेमः आत्मस्वरूपतत्प्राप्त्युपायबहिर्भूतानाम् अर्थानां योगं प्राप्तानां च क्षेमं परिपालनं परित्यज्य आत्मवान् भव, आत्मस्वरूपान्वेषणपरो भव । अप्राप्तस्य प्राप्तिः योगः, प्राप्तस्य परिरक्षणं क्षेमः । एवं वर्तमानस्य ते रजस्तमः प्रचुरता नश्यति सत्त्वं च वर्धते । 45 । It may be questioned why the Vedas, which have more of love for Jivas than thousands of parents, and which are endeavouring to save the Jivas, should prescribe in this way rites whose fruits are infinitesimal and which produce only new births. It can also be asked if it is proper to abandon what is given in the Vedas. Sri Krshna replies to these questions.The word Traigunya means the three Gunas - Sattva, Rajas and Tamas. Here the term Traigunya denotes persons in whom Sattva, Rajas and Tamas are in abundance.The Vedas in prescribing desire-oriented rituals(Kamya-karmas) have such persons in view. Because of their great love, the Vedas teach what is good to those in whom Tamas, Rajas and Sattva preponderate. If the Vedas had not explained to these persons the means for the attainment of heaven etc., according to the Gunas, then thosepersons who are not interested in liberation owing to absence of Sattva and preponderance of Rajas and Tamas in them, would get completely lost amidst what should not be resorted to, without Knowing the means for attaining the results they desire. Hence the Vedas are concerned withthe Gunas. Be you free from the three Gunas. Try to acquire Sattva in abundance; increase that alone. The purport is: do not nurse the preponderance of the three Gunas in their state of inter-mixture; do not cultivate such preponderance. Be free from the pairs of opposites; be free from all the characteristics of worldly life. Abide in pure Sattva; be established in Sattva, in its state of purity without the admixture of the other two Gunas. If it is questioned how that is possible, the reply is as follows. Never care to acquire things nor protect what has been acquired. While abandoning the acquisition of what is not required for self-realisation, abandon also the conservation of such things already acquired. You can thus be established in self-control and thereby become an aspirant after the essential nature of the self. 'Yoga' is acquisition of what has not been acquired; 'Kshema' is preservation of things already acquired. Abandoning these is a must for an aspirant after the essential nature of the self. If you conduct yourself in this way, the preponderance of Rajas and Tamas will be annihilated, and pure Sattva will develop.   
041 न च वेदोदितं सर्वं सर्वस्य उपादेयम् -यथा सर्वार्थपरिकल्पिते सर्वतः संप्लुतोदके उदपाने पिपासोः यावान् अर्थः यावद् एव प्रयोजनं पानीयम् तावद् एव तेन उपादीयते न सर्वम्; एवम् सर्वेषु वेदेषु ब्राह्मणस्य विजानतः वैदिकस्य मुमुक्षोः यदेव मोक्षसाधनं तद् एव उपादेयम्, न अन्यत् । 46 । Besides, all that is taught in the Vedas is not fit to be utilised by all.Whatever use, a thirsty person has for a reservoir, which is flooded with water on all sides and which has been constructed for all kinds of purposes like irrigation, only to that extent of it, i.e., enough to drink will be of use to the thirsty person and not all the water. Likewise, whatever in all the Vedas form the means for release to a knowing Brahman a,i.e., one who is established in the study of the Vedas andwho aspires for release only to that extent is it to be accepted by him and not anything else.  
042 अतः सत्त्वस्थस्य मुमुक्षोः एतावद् एव उपादेयम् इत्याह -नित्ये नैमित्तिके काम्ये च केनचित् फलविशेषेण संबन्धितया श्रूयमाणे कर्मंणि नित्यसत्त्वस्थस्य मुमुक्षोः ते कर्ममात्रे अधिकारः । तत्संबन्धितया अवगतेषु फलेषु न कदाचिद् अपि अधिकारः । सफलस्य बन्धरूपत्वात् फलरहितस्य केवलस्य मदाराधनरूपस्य मोक्षहेतुत्वाच्च ।मा च कर्मफलयोः हेतुः भूः । त्वया अनुष्ठीयमाने अपि कर्मणि नित्यसत्त्वस्थस्य मुमुक्षोः तवाकर्तृत्वम् अपि अनुसन्धेयम् । फलस्य अपि क्षुन्निवृत्त्यादेः न त्वं हेतुः इति अनुसन्धेयम् ।तद् उभयं गुणेषु वा सर्वेश्वरे मयि वा अनुसन्धेयम् इति उत्तरत्र वक्ष्यते । एवम् अनुसन्धाय कर्म कुरु । अकर्मणि अननुष्ठाने न योत्स्यामि इति यत् त्वया अभिहितं न तत्र ते सङ्गः अस्तु । उक्तेन प्रकारेण युद्धादिकर्मणि एव सङ्गः अस्तु इत्यर्थः । 47 । Sri Krshna now says that this much alone is to be accepted by an aspirant, established in sattva:As for obligatory, occasional and desiderative acts taught in the Vedasand associated with some result or other, you, an aspirant established in Sattva, have the right only to perform them: You have no right to the fruits known to be derived from such acts. Acts done with a desire for fruit bring about bondage. But acts done without an eye on fruits form My worship and become a means for release. Do not become an agent of  acts with the idea of being the reaper of their fruits. Even when you, who are established in pure Sattva and are desirous of release, perform acts, you should not look upon yourself as the agent. Likewise, it is necessary to contemplate yourself as not being the cause of even appeasing hunger and such other bodily necessities. Later on it will be said that both of these, agency of action and desire for fruits, should be considered as belonging to Gunas, or in the alternative to Me who am the Lord of all. Thinking thus, do work. With regard to inaction, i.e., abstaining from performance of duties, as when you said, 'I will not fight,' let there be no attachment to such inaction in you. The meaning is let your interest be only in the discharge of such obligatory duties like this war in the manner described above.  
043 एतद् एव स्पष्टीकरोति -राज्यबन्धुप्रभृतिषु सङ्गं त्यक्त्वा युद्धादीनि कर्माणि योगस्थः कुरु । तदन्तर्भूतविजयादि-सिद्ध्यसिद्ध्योः समो भूत्वा कुरु । तद् इदं सिद्ध्यसिद्ध्योः समत्वम्, योगस्थ इत्यत्रयोगशब्देन उच्यते । योगः सिद्ध्यसिद्ध्योः समत्वरूपं चित्तसमाधानम् । Sri Krshna makes this clear in the following verse:Abandoning the attachment to kingdom, relatives etc., and established in Yoga, engage in war and such other activities. Perform these with equanimity as regards success and failure resulting from victory etc., which are inherent in them. This equanimity with regard to success and failure is called here by the term Yoga, in the expression 'established in Yoga'. Yoga is equanimity of mind which takes the form of evenness in success and failure.   
044 किमर्थम् इदम् असकृद् उच्यते? इत्यत आह -यः अयं प्रधानफलत्यागविषयः अवान्तरफलसिद्ध्यसिद्ध्योः समत्वविषयश्च बुद्धियोगः तद्युक्तात् कर्मणः इतरत् कर्म दूरेण अवरम् । महद् एतद् द्वयोः उत्कर्षापकर्षरूपं वैरूप्यम् -उक्तबुद्धियोगयुक्तं कर्म निखिलं सांसारिकं दुःखं विनिवर्त्य परमपुरुषार्थलक्षणं च मोक्षं प्रापयति; इतरत् अपरिमितदुःखस्वरूपं संसारम् इति अतः कर्मणि क्रियमाणे उक्तायां बुद्धौ शरणम् अन्विच्छ । शरणं वासस्थानम्; तस्याम् एव बुद्धौ वर्तस्व इत्यर्थः । कृपणाः फलहेतवः फलसङ्गादिना कर्म कुर्वाणाः कृपणाः संसारिणो भवेयुः । 49 । Sri Krshna explains why this is repeatedly said:All other kinds of action are far inferior to those done with evenness of mind, which consists in the renunciation of the main result and with equanimity towards success or failure in respect of the secondary results. Between the two kinds of actions, the one with equanimity and the otherwith attachment, the former associated with equanimity removes all the sufferings of Samsara and leads to release which is the highest object of human existence. The latter type of actions, which is pursued with an eye on results, leads one to Samsara whose character is endless suffering.Thus when an act is being done, take refuge in Buddhi (evenness of mind). Refuge means abode. Live in that Buddhi, is the meaning. 'Miserable are they who act with a motive for results': it means, 'Those who act with attachment to the results, etc., are miserable, as they will continue in Samsara.'  
045 बुद्धियोगयुक्तः तु कर्म कुर्वाण उभे सुकृतदुष्कृते अनादिकालसञ्चिते अनन्ते बन्धहेतुभूते जहाति । तस्माद् उक्ताय बुद्धियोगाय युज्यस्व । योगः कर्मसु कौशलं कर्मसु क्रियमाणेषु अयं बुद्धियोगः कौशलम्, अतिसामर्थ्यम्; अतिसामर्थ्यसाध्यः इत्यर्थः । 50 । He, who is established in evenness of mind in the performance of actions, relinquishes good and evil Karmas which have accumulated from time immemorial causing bondage endlessly. Therefore acquire this aforesaid evenness of mind (Buddhi Yoga). Yoga is skill in action. That is, this evenness of mind when one is engaged in action, is possiblethrough great skill, i.e., ability.  
046 बुद्धियोगयुक्ताः कर्मजं फलं त्यक्त्वा कर्म कुर्वन्तः, तस्माद् जन्मबन्धविनिर्मुक्ताः अनामयं पदं गच्छन्ति । हि प्रसिद्धम् एतत् सर्वासु उपनिषत्सु इत्यर्थः । 51 । Those who possess this evenness of mind while performing actions and relinquish their fruits, are freed from the bondage of rebirth, and go to the region beyond all ills. ' Hi' means that this dictum or teaching is well known in all the Upanishads.  
047 उक्तप्रकारेण कर्मणि वर्तमानस्य तया वृत्त्या निर्धूतकल्मषस्य ये बुद्धिः यदा मोहकलिलम् अत्यल्पफलसङ्गहेतुभूतं मोहरूपं कलुषं व्यतितरिष्यति । तदा अस्मत्त इतः पूर्वं त्याज्यतया श्रुतस्य फलादेः इतः पश्चात् श्रोतव्यस्य च कृते स्वयम् एव निर्वेदं गन्तासि गमिष्यसि । 52 । If you act in this manner and get freed from impurities, your intellect will pass beyond the tangle of delusion. The dense impurity of sin is the nature of that delusion which generates attachment to infinitesimal results, of which you have already heard much from us and will hear more later on. You will then immediately feel, of your own accord,renunciation or feeling of disgust for them all.  
048 'योगे त्विमां शृणु' इत्यादिना उक्तस्य आत्मयाथात्म्यज्ञानपूर्वकस्य बुद्धिविशेषसंस्कृत-कर्मानुष्ठानस्य लक्षणभूतं योगाख्यं फलम् आह -श्रुतिः श्रवणम्; अस्मत्तः श्रवणेन प्रतिपन्ना सकलेतरविसजातीयनित्यनिरतिशयसूक्ष्मतत्त्वविषया स्वयम् अचला एकरूपा बुद्धिः असङ्गकर्मानुष्ठानेन विमलीकृते मनसि यदा निश्चला स्थास्यति तदा योगम् आत्मावलोकनम् अवाप्स्यसि । एतद् उक्तं भवति - शास्त्रजन्यात्मज्ञानपूर्वककर्मयोगः स्थितप्रज्ञताख्यज्ञाननिष्ठाम् आपादयति,ज्ञाननिष्ठारूपा स्थितप्रज्ञता तु योगाख्यम् आत्मावलोकनं साधयति इति । 53 । Sri Krshna now teaches the goal called self-realisation (Yoga) which results from the performance of duty as taught in the passage beginning with 'Now, listen to this with regard to Karma Yoga' (2.39) which is based on the knowledge of the real nature of the self gained through the refinement of the mind.Here 'Sruti' means hearing (and not the Veda). When your intellect, which, by hearing from us, has become specially enlightened, having for its object the eternal, unsurpassedand subtle self - which belongs to a class different fromall other entities -, then the intellect is firmly fixed,i.e., in a single psychosis and stands unshaken. In such a concentrated mind, purified by the performance of duties without attachment, will be generated true Yoga, which consists in the vision of the self. What is said is this: KarmaYoga, which presupposes the knowledge of the real nature of the self obtained from the scriptures, leads to a firm devotion to knowledge known as the state of firm wisdom; and the state of 'firm wisdom,' which is in the form of devotion to knowledge, generates the vision of the self; this vision is here called Yoga.   
049 एवम् उक्तः पार्थो निसङ्गकर्मानुष्ठानरूपकर्मयोगसाध्यस्थितप्रज्ञताया योगसाधनभूतायाः स्वरूपं स्थितप्रज्ञस्यानुष्ठानप्रकारं च पृच्छति -अर्जुन उवाच -समाधिस्थस्य  स्थितप्रज्ञस्य का भाषा को वाचकः शब्दः - तस्य स्वरूपं कीदृशम् इत्यर्थः । स्थितप्रज्ञः किं च भाषणादिकं करोति । 54 । Arjuna, thus taught, questions about the nature of 'firm wisdom' whichconstitutes the means for the attainment of Yoga and which itself isattainable through Karma Yoga which consists in work with detachment,and also about the mode of behaviour of a man of 'firm wisdom'.What is the speech of a man of firm wisdom who is abiding with the mind controlled? What words can describe his state? What is his nature? This is the meaning of 'How does a man of firm wisdom speak etc. ?'  
050 वृत्तिविशेषकथनेन स्वरूपम् अपि उक्तं भवति इति वृत्तिविशेष उच्यते -श्री भगवानुवाच -आत्मनि एव आत्मना मनसा आत्मैकावलम्बनेन तुष्टः तेन तोषेण तद्व्यतिरिक्तान् सर्वान् मनोगतान् कामान् यदा प्रकर्षेण जहाति तदा अयं स्थितप्रज्ञ इति उच्यते । ज्ञाननिष्ठाकाष्ठा इयम् । 55 । His specific conduct is now described as his nature can be inferred therefrom.When a person is satisfied in himself with himself, i.e., when his mind depends on the self within himself; and being content with that, expels all the desires of the mind which are different from that state of mind -then he is said to be a man of firm wisdom. This is the highest form ofdevotion to knowledge.  
051 अनन्तरं ज्ञाननिष्ठस्य ततः अर्वाचीना अदूरविप्रकृष्टावस्था उच्यते -प्रियविश्लेषादि दुःखनिमित्तेषु उपस्थितेषु अनुद्विग्नमनाः न दुःखी भवति, सुखेषु विगतस्पृहःप्रियेषु सन्निहितेषु अपि निःस्पृहः, वीतरागभयक्रोधः अनागतेषु स्पृहा रागस्तद्रहितः,प्रियविश्लेषाप्रियागमनहेतुदर्शननिमित्तं दुःखं भयम्, तद्रहितः, प्रियविश्लेषाप्रियागमनहेतुभूत-चेतनान्तरगतो दुःखहेतुः स्वमनोविकारः क्रोधः, तद्रहितः, एवंभूतो मुनिः आत्ममननशीलः स्थितधीः इति  उच्यते । 56 । Then, the lower state, not far below it, of one established in firm wisdom, is described:Even when there are reasons for grief like separation from beloved ones, his mind is not perturbed, i.e., he is not aggrieved. He has no longing to enjoy pleasures, i.e., even though the things which he likes are near him, he has no longing for them. He is free from desire and anger; desire islonging for objects not yet obtained; he is free from this. Fear is afflictionproduced from the knowledge of the factors which cause separation from the beloved or from meeting with that which is not desirable; he is free from this. Anger is a disturbed state of one's own mind which produces affliction and which is aimed at another sentient being who is the cause of separation from the beloved or of confrontation with what is not desirable. He is free from this.A sage of this sort, who constantly meditates on the self, is said to be of firm wisdom.  
052 ततः अर्वाचीनदशा प्रोच्यते -यः सर्वत्र प्रियेषु अनभिस्नेहः उदासीनः प्रियसंश्लेषविश्लेषरूपं शुभाशुभं प्राप्य अभिनन्दनद्वेषरहितः सोऽपि स्थितप्रज्ञः । 57। Then, the next state below this is described:He, who, has no love for all pleasing objects, i.e., who is indifferent to them, and who does not feel attraction or repulsion when he is united with or separated from attractive or repulsive objects respectively, who neither rejoices at the former, nor hates the latter - he also is of firm wisdom.  
053 ततः अर्वाचीनदशा प्रोच्यते -यदा इन्द्रियाणि इन्द्रियार्थान् स्प्रष्टुम् उद्युक्तानि तदा एव कूर्मंः अङ्गानि इव इन्द्रियार्थेभ्यः सर्वशः प्रतिसंहृत्य मन आत्मनि एव स्थापयति सोऽपि स्थितप्रज्ञः । 58 । Sri Krshna now mentions the next lower state. When one is able to draw the senses away from the sense-objects on every side when the senses try to contact the sense-objects, just as a tortoise draws in its limbs, and is capable of fixing his mind on the self- he too is of firm wisdom. Thus, there are four stages of devotion to knowledge, each stage being perfected through the succeeding stage.  
054 एवं चतुर्विधा ज्ञाननिष्ठा पूर्वपूर्वोत्तरोत्तरनिष्पाद्या इति प्रतिपादितम् । इदानीं ज्ञाननिष्ठाया दुष्प्रापतां तत्प्राप्त्युपायं च आह -इन्द्रियाणाम् आहारो विषयाः, निराहारस्य विषयेभ्यः प्रत्याहृतेन्द्रियस्य देहिनो विषयाः विनिवर्तमाना रसवर्जं विनिवर्तन्ते । रसो रागः, विषयरागो न निवर्तते इत्यर्थः । रागः अपि आत्मस्वरूपं विषयेभ्यः परं सुखतरं दृष्ट्वा विनिवर्तते । 59 । Now Sri Krishna speaks of the difficulty of the attainment of firm devotion to knowledge and the means of that attainment.The sense objects are the food of the senses. From the abstinent embodied being, i.e., from one who has withdrawn senses from objects, these sense-objects, being rejected by him, turn away, but not the relish for them. Relish means hankering. The meaning is that the hankering for the sense-objects does not go away by abstinence alone. But even this hankering will go away, when one sees that the essential nature of the self is superior to the sense-objects and that the realisation of this self gives greater happiness than the enjoyment of sense-objects.  
055 आत्मदर्शनेन विना विषयरागो न निवर्तते, अनिवृत्ते विषयरागे विपश्चितो यतमानस्य अपि पुरुषस्य इन्द्रियाणि प्रमाथीनि बलवन्ति मनः प्रसह्य हरन्ति । एवम् इन्द्रियजय आत्मदर्शनाधीन आत्मदर्शनम् इन्द्रियजयाधीनम्; इति ज्ञाननिष्ठा दुष्प्राप्या । 60 । Except by the experience of the self, the hankering for objects will not go away. When the hankering for the sense-objects does not go away, the senses of even a wise man, though he is ever striving to subdue them,become refractory, i.e., become violent and carry away perforce the mind. Thus, the subduing of the senses depends on the vision of the self, and the vision of the self depends on the subduing of the senses. Consequently, i.e., because of this mutual dependence, firm devotion to knowledge is difficult to achieve.  
056 सर्वस्य दोषस्य परिजिहीर्षया विषयानुरागयुक्ततया दुर्जयानि इन्द्रियाणि संयम्य चेतसः शुभाश्रयभूते मयि मनः अवस्थाप्य समाहितः आसीत । मनसि मद्विषये सति निर्दग्धाशेष-कल्मषतया निर्मलीकृतं विषयानुरागरहितं मन इन्द्रियाणि स्ववशानि करोति । ततो वश्येन्द्रियं मन आत्मदर्शनाय प्रभवति । उक्तं च - 'यथाग्निरुद्धतशिखः कक्षं दहति सानिलः । तथा चित्तस्थितो विष्णुर्योगिनां सर्वकिल्बिषम्' ।। (वि0 पु0 6।7।74) इति । तदाह - वशे हि यस्येन्द्रियाणि तस्य प्रज्ञा प्रतिष्ठता इति । 61 । With a desire to overcome this mutual dependence between the subduing of the senses and vision of the self, one has to conquer the senses which are difficult to subdue on account of their attachment to sense-objects. So, focussing the mind on Me who am the only auspicious object formeditation, let him remain steadfast. When the mind is focussed on Me as its object, then such a mind, purified by the burning away of all impurities and devoid of attachment to the senses, is able to control the senses. Then the mind with the senses under control will be able to experience the self. As said in Vishnu Purana, `As the leaping fire fanned by the wind burns away a forest of dry trees, so Vishnu, who isin the hearts of all the Yogins, destroys all the sins.' Sri Krshna teaches the same here: 'He whose senses are under control, his knowledge is firmly set.'  
057 एवं मयि अनिवेश्य मनः स्वयत्नगौरवेण इन्द्रियजये प्रवृत्तो विनष्टो भवति इत्याह -अनिरस्तविषयानुरागस्य हि मयि अनिवेशितमनस इन्द्रियाणि संयम्य अवस्थितस्य अपि अनादिपापवासनया विषयध्यानम् अवर्जनीयं स्यात् । ध्यायतो विषयान् पुंसः पुनरपि सङ्गः अतिप्रवृद्धो जायते । सङ्गात् संजायते कामः । कामो नाम सङ्गस्य विपाकदशा । पुरुषो यां दशाम् आपन्नो विषयान् अभुक्त्वा स्थातुं न शक्नोति स कामः । कामात् क्रोधः अभिजायते । कामे वर्तमाने विषये च असन्निहिते सन्निहितान् पुरुषान् प्रति एभिः अस्मदिष्टं विहतम् इति क्रोधो भवति । 62 । Sri Krshna says: 'One who endeavours to subdue the senses, depending on one's own exertions, and does not focus the mind on Me in this way, becomes lost.'Indeed, in respect of a person, whose attachment to sense-objects is expelled but whose mind is not focussed on Me, even though he controlsthe senses, contemplation on sense-objects is unavoidable on account of the impressions of sins from time immemorial. Again attachment increases fully in 'a man who thinks about sense-objects'. 'Fromattachment arises desire.' What is called 'desire' is the further stage of attachment. After reaching that stage, it is not possible for a man to stay without experiencing the sense-objects. 'From such desire arises anger.' When a desire exists without its object being nearby, anger arises against persons nearby under the feeling, 'Our desire is thwarted by these persons.''From anger there comes delusion'. Delusion is want of discrimination between what ought to be done and what ought not to be done. Not possessing that discrimination, one does anything and everything. Then there follows the failure of memory, i.e., of the impressions of the earlierefforts of sense control, when one strives again to control the senses.  
058 क्रोधाद् भवति संमोहः । संमोहः कृत्याकृत्यविवेकशून्यता तया सर्वं करोति । ततश्च प्रारब्धे इन्द्रियजयादिके प्रयत्ने स्मृतिभ्रंशो भवति । स्मृतिभ्रंशाद् बुद्धिनाशः, आत्मज्ञाने यो व्यवसायः कृतः, तस्य नाशः स्यात् । बुद्धिनाशाद् पुनरपि संसारे निमग्नो नष्टो भवति । 63 । 'From the loss of memory there comes the destruction of discrimination.' The meaning is that there will be destruction of the effect of efforts madeearlier to attain the knowledge of the self. From the destruction of discrimination, one becomes lost, i.e., is sunk in Samsara or worldliness.  
059 उक्तेन प्रकारेण मयि सर्वेश्वरे चेतसः शुभाश्रयभूते न्यस्तमना निर्दग्धाशेषकल्मषतया रागद्वेषवियुक्तैः आत्मवश्यैः इन्द्रियैः विषयान् चरन् विषयान् तिरस्कृत्य वर्तमानो विधेयात्मा विधेयमनाः प्रसादम् अधिगच्छति । निर्मलान्तः करणो भवति इत्यर्थः । 64 । Having focussed, in the way already described, the mind on Me - the Lord of all and the auspicious object of meditation, he who goes through,i.e., considers with contempt the sense-objects, with senses under controland free from hate and attraction by reason of all impurities of mind being burnt out - such a person has a disciplined self, i.e., disciplinedmind. He attains serenity. The meaning is that his mind will be free of impurities.  
060 अस्य पुरुषस्य मनसः प्रसादे सति प्रकृतिसंसर्गप्रयुक्तसर्वदुःखानां हानिः उपजायते । प्रसन्नचेतसः आत्मावलोकनविरोधिदोषरहितमनसः तदानीम् एव हि विविक्तात्मविषया बुद्धिः मयि पर्यवतिष्ठते; अतो मनःप्रसादे र्वदुःखानां हानिः भवति एव । 65 । When the mind of this person gets serene, he gets rid of all sorrows originating from contact with matter. For, in respect of the person whosemind is serene, i.e., is free from the evil which is antagonistic to the vision of the self, the Buddhi, having the pure self for its object, becomes established immediately. Thus, when the mind is serene, the loss of all sorrow surely arises.  
061 मयि संन्यस्तमनोरथस्य स्वयत्नेन इन्द्रियदमने प्रवृत्तस्य कदाचिद् अपि विविक्तात्मनिषया बुद्धिः न सेत्स्यति । अत एव तस्य तद्भावना च न संभवति । विविक्तात्मानम् अभावयतो विषयस्पृहाशान्तिः न भवति । अशान्तस्य विषयस्पृहायुक्तस्य कुतो नित्यनिरतिशय-सुखप्राप्तिः । 66 । In him who does not focus his mind on Me but is engaged only in the control of senses by his own exertion, the Buddhi or the right disposition that is concerned with the pure self never arises. Therefore he fails in the practice of meditation on the self. In one who cannot think of the pure self, there arises the desire for sense objects; in him serenity does not arise. How can eternal and unsurpassed bliss be generated in him who is not serene but is attached to sense-objects? [The idea is that without the aid of devotion to God, the effort to control the senses by one's will power alone will end in failure.]  
062 पुनरपि उक्तेन प्रकारेण इन्द्रियनियमनम् अकुर्वतः अनर्थम् आह -इन्द्रियाणां विषयेषु चरतां विषयेषु वर्तमानानां वर्तनम् अनु यन्मनः अनुविधीयते पुरुषेण अनुवर्त्यते तत् मनः अस्य विविक्तात्मप्रवणां प्रज्ञां हरति विषये प्रवणतां करोति इत्यर्थः । यथा अम्भसि नीयमानां नावं प्रतिकूलो वायुः प्रसह्य हरति । 67 । Sri Krshna speaks again of the calamity that befalls one who does not practise the control of the senses in the way prescribed above:That mind, which is allowed by a person to be submissive to, i.e., allowed to go after the senses which go on operating, i.e., experiencing sense-objects, such a mind loses its inclination towards the pure self. The meaning is that it gets inclined towards sense-objects. Just as a contrary wind forcibly carries away a ship moving on the waters, in the same manner wisdom also is carried away from such a mind. [The idea is that the pursuit of sense pleasures dulls one's spiritual inclination, and the mind ultimately succumbs to them unresisting.]  
063 तस्माद् उक्तेन प्रकारेण शुभाश्रये मयि निविष्टमनसो यस्य इन्द्रियाणि इन्द्रियार्थेभ्यः सर्वशो निगृहीतानि तस्य एव आत्मनि प्रज्ञा प्रतिष्ठिता भवति । 68 । Therefore, in the way described above, he whose mind is focussed on Me the auspicious object for meditation, and whose senses are thereby restrained from sense-objects in every way, in his mind alone wisdom is firmly set.  
064 एवं नियतेन्द्रियस्य प्रसन्नमनसः सिद्धिम् आह -या आत्मविषया बुद्धिः सर्वभूतानां निशा निशा इव अप्रकाशिका । तस्याम् आत्मविषयायां बुद्धौ इन्द्रियसंयमी प्रसन्नमना जागर्ति - आत्मानम्अवलोकयन् आस्ते इत्यर्थः । यस्यां शब्दादिविषयायां बुद्धौ सर्वाणि भूतानि जाग्रति प्रबुद्धानि भवन्ति, सा शब्दादिविषया बुद्धिःआत्मानं पश्यतो मुनेः निशा इव अप्रकाशिका भवति । 69 । Sri Krshna now speaks of the state of attainment by one whose senses are subdued and whose mind is serene.That Buddhi ( understanding) which has the self for its object, is night to all beings, i.e., is obscure like night to all. But he, who has subdued the senses and is serene, is awake in respect of the self. The meaning is that he has the vision of the self. All beings are awake, i.e., are actively cognisant in respect of objects of the senses like sound. But such sense-objects are like things enshrouded by night to the sage who is awake to the self.  
065 यथा आत्मना एव आपूर्यमाणम् एकरूपं समुद्रं नादेया आपः प्रविशन्ति, आसाम् अपां प्रवेशे अपि अप्रवेशे वा समुद्रो न कञ्चन विशेषम् आपद्यते । एवं सर्वे कामाः शब्दादिविषया यं संयमिनं प्रविशन्ति इन्द्रियगोचरतां यान्ति स शान्तिम् आप्नोति । शब्दादिषु इन्द्रियगोचरताम् आपन्नेषु अनापन्नेषु च स्वात्मावलोकनतृप्त्या एव यो न विकारम् आप्नोति स एव शान्तिम् आप्नोति इत्यर्थः, न कामकामी, यः शब्दादिभिर्विक्रियते स कदाचिद् अपि न शान्तिम् आप्नोति । 70 । The river waters enter into the sea which is full by itself and is thus the same, i.e., unchanging in shape. The sea exhibits no special increase or decrease, whether the waters of rivers enter it or not. Even so do all objects of desire, i.e., objects of sense perception like sound etc., enter into a self-controlled one, i.e., they produce only sensorial impressionsbut no reaction from him. Such a person will attain peace. The meaning is that he alone attains to peace, who by reason of the contentment coming from the vision of the self, feels no disturbance when objects of sense like sound, etc., come within the ken of the senses or when they do not come. This is not the case with one who runs after desires.Whoever is agitated by sound and other objects, never attains to peace.  
066 काम्यन्ते इति कामाः शब्दादयो विषयाः । यः पुमान् शब्दादीन् सर्वान्विषयान् विहाय तत्र निःस्पृहः ममतारहितश्च अनात्मनि देहे आत्माभिमानरहितः चरति स आत्मानं दृष्ट्वा शान्तिम् अधिगच्छति । 71 । What are desired, they are called the objects of desire.These are sound and other sense-objects. The person, who wants peace must abandon all sense-objects such as sound, touch etc. He should have no longing for them. He should be without the sense of 'mineness' regarding them, as that sense arises from the misconception that the body, which is really non-self, is the self. He who lives in this way attains to peace after seeing the self.  
067 एषा नित्यात्मज्ञानपूर्विका असङ्गकर्मणि स्थितिः स्थितधीलक्षणा ब्राह्मी ब्रह्मप्रापिका । ईदृशीं कर्मस्थितिं प्राप्य न विमुह्मति न पुनः संसारम् आप्नोति । अस्यां स्थित्याम् अन्तिमे अपि वयसि स्थित्वा ब्रह्म निर्वाणं ऋच्छति निर्वाणमयं ब्रह्म गच्छति, सुखैकतानम् आत्मानम्आप्नोति इत्यर्थः ।एवम् आत्मयाथात्म्यं युद्धाख्यस्य च कर्मणः तत्प्राप्तिसाधनताम् अजानतः शरीरात्मज्ञानेन मोहितस्य तेन च मोहेन युद्धात् निवृत्तस्य तन्मोहशान्तये नित्यात्मविषया सांख्यबुद्धिः तत्पूर्विका च असङ्गकर्मानुष्ठानरूपकर्मयोगविषया बुद्धिः स्थितप्रज्ञतायोगसाधनभूता द्वितीयेऽध्याये प्रोक्ता । तदुक्तम् - 'नित्यात्मासङ्गकर्मेहागोचरा सांख्ययोगधीः । द्वितीये स्थितधीलक्ष्या प्रोक्ता तन्मोहशान्तये' ।। (गीतार्थसंग्रहे 6) इति । 72 । This state of performing disinterested work which is preceded by the knowledge of the eternal self and which is characterised by firm wisdom,is the Brahmi-state, which secures the attainment of the Brahman (the self). After attaining such a state, he will not be deluded, i.e., he will not get again the mortal coil. Reaching this state even during the last years of life, he wins the blissful Brahman (the self) i.e. ; which is full of beatitude. The meaning is that he attains the self which is constituted of nothing but bliss.Thus in the second chapter, the Lord wanted to remove the delusion of Arjuna, who did not know the real nature of the self and also did not realize that the activity named 'war' (here an ordained duty) is a means for attaining the nature of Sankhya or the self. Arjuna was under the delusion that the body is itself the self, and dominated by that delusion,had retreated from battle. He was therefore taught the knowledge called 'Sankhya' or the understanding of the self, and Yoga or what is called thepath of practical work without attachment. These together have as their objective the attainment of steady wisdom (Sthitaprajna).This has been explained in the following verse by Sri Yamunacarya: Sankhya and Yoga, which comprehend within their scope the understanding of the eternal self and the practical way of disinterested action respectively, were imparted in order to remove Arjuna's delusion.Through them the state of firm wisdom can be reached.  
068 तृतीयोऽध्यायःतद् एव मुमुक्षुभिः परमप्राप्यतया वेदान्तोदितनिरस्तनिखिलाविद्यादिदोषगन्धानवधिकातिशया-संख्येयकल्याणगुणगण परबह्म पुरुषोत्तमप्राप्त्युपासनध्यानादिशब्दवाच्यतदैकान्तिकात्यन्तिक-भक्तियोगं वक्तुं तदङ्गभूतम् 'य आत्मापहतपाप्मा' (छा0 उ0 8।7।1) इत्यादि प्रजापति-वाक्योदितं प्राप्तुः आत्मनो याथात्म्यदर्शनं तन्नित्यताज्ञानपूर्वकासङ्गकर्मनिष्पाद्यज्ञानयोगसाध्यम् उक्तम् ।प्रजापतिवाक्ये हि दहरवाक्योदितपरविद्याशेषतया प्राप्तुः आत्मनः स्वरूपदर्शनं 'यस्तमात्मानमनुविद्य विजानाति' (छा0 उ0 8।12।6) इति उक्त्वा जागरितस्वप्नसुषुप्त्यतीतं प्रत्यगात्मस्वरूपम् अशरीरं प्रतिपाद्य 'एवमेवैष सम्प्रसादोऽस्माच्छरीरात्समुत्थाय परंज्योतिरुपसम्पद्य स्वेन रूपेणाभिनिष्पद्यते' (छा0 उ0 8।12।3) इति दहरविद्याफलेन उपसंहृतम् ।अन्यत्र अपि 'अध्यात्मयोगाधिगमेन देवं मत्वा धीरो हर्षशोकौ जहाति' (क0 उ0 1।2।12) इत्येवमादिषु 'देवं मत्वा' इति विधीयमानपरविद्याङ्गतया 'अध्यात्मयोगाधिगमेन' इति प्रत्यगात्मज्ञानम् अपि विधाय 'न जायते म्रियते वा विपश्चित्' (क0 उ0 1।2।18) इत्यादिना प्रत्यगात्मस्वरूपं विशोध्य 'अणोरणीयान्' (1।2।20) इत्यारभ्य 'महान्तं विभुमात्मानं मत्वा धीरो न शोचति' (क0 उ0 1।2।22) 'नायमात्मा प्रवचनेन लभ्यो न मेधया न बहुना श्रुतेन । यमेवैष वृणुते तेन लभ्यस्तस्यैष आत्मा विवृणुते तनूं स्वाम् ।। '(क0 उ0 1।2।23) इत्यादिभिः परस्वरूपं तदुपासनम् उपासनस्य च भक्तिरूपतां प्रतिपाद्य 'विज्ञानसारथिर्यस्तु मनः प्रग्रहवान्नरः । सोऽध्वनः पारमाप्नोति तद्विष्णोः परमं पदम् ।।' (क0 उ0 1।3।9) इतिपरविद्याफलेनोपसंहृतम् ।अतः परम् अध्यायचतुष्टयेन इदम् एव प्राप्तुः प्रत्यगात्मनो दर्शनं ससाधनं प्रपञ्च्यते - Communion through actionFor elucidating Bhakti which is single-minded and abiding, which is expressed by the terms knowledge (Vedana), worship (Upasana), meditation (Dhyana), etc., which constitutes the means of realising the Supreme Person, who is the Supreme Brahman, and who is described in the Vedanta as the goal of all aspirants - as being devoid of even afaint trace of blemish like nescience, and as endowed with a multitude of countless auspicious attributes beyond all limitations and unsurpassed- for teaching such Bhakti the vision of the real nature of the seeker's self has been given in chapter II. This vision is accessory to Bhakti, as said in the instruction of Prajapati, beginning with 'He who is the selfdevoid of evil etc.' (Cha. u. , 8.7.1 ) and other texts. It is attainable through Jnana Yoga derived from actions without attachment to their fruits, after acquiring a knowledge of self's eternality.In the statement of Prajapati, the understanding of the essential nature of the self of the seeker as being subsidiary to the knowledge of the Supreme Brahman, imparted in the instruction concerning Dahara (the subtle) i.e., theBrahman, as the ethereal space within the heart, has beendescribed thus: 'He who knowing the essential nature of the self, meditates on It' (Ibid.) Explaining the nature of the individual self as transcending the states of waking, dreaming and deep sleep and as being bodiless, it is concluded with the statement of the fruits of Dahara - Vidya thus: 'Likewise the individual self, rising up from the body, reaches the Supreme Light and manifests Itself in Its own true form' (Cha.u., 8.7.6).Elsewhere, too, in the passage beginning with 'The wise man leaves behind joy and sorrow after knowing God by the knowledge of the self brought about by Yogic self-concentration' (Ka.U. 1.2.12) theknowledge of the individual self is enjoined by the words 'By knowledgebrought about by Yogic self-concentration, 'by reason of its being ancillary to the knowledge of the Supreme Brahman enjoined in the words, 'After knowing God'. The essential nature of the individual self is then enquired into in such texts as: 'The individual self is not born, nor dies' (Ibid., 1.2.18). Then beginning with the passage, 'He is more minutethan the minute' (Ibid., 1.2.20), the nature of the Supreme Self, His meditation and the nature of meditation in the form of Bhakti are all elucidated by means of such texts as 'The wise man, after knowing Him to be the Self, who is great and omnipresent, does not grieve' (Ibid: 1.2.22) and 'This Self cannot be obtained by Vedic teaching, nor by meditation, nor by much hearing; whomsoever this Self chooses, by him alone is He reached. To him this Self reveals His own form' (Ibid.,1.2.23). The whole instruction is concluded with mention of the fruits of the knowledge of the Supreme Brahman by theText, 'But the person who has understanding for his charioteer, and the mind for his reins, he reaches the other end of his journey and that is the highest abode of Vishnu (ibid.,1.3.9).  

