276 नवमोऽध्यायःउपासकभेदनिबन्धना विशेषाः प्रतिपादिताः, इदानीं उपास्यस्य परमपुरुषस्य माहात्म्यं ज्ञानिनां चविशेषं विशोध्य भक्तिरूपस्य उपासनस्य स्वरूपम् उच्यते -श्रीभगवानुवाचइदं तु ते गुह्यतमं भक्तिरूपं उपासनाख्यं ज्ञानं विज्ञानसहितम् उपासनगतिविशेषज्ञानसहितम्अनसूयवे ते प्रवक्ष्यामि । मद्विषयं सकलेतरविसजातीयम् अपरिमितप्रकारं माहात्म्यं श्रुत्वाएवम् एव संभवति इति मन्वानाय ते प्रवक्ष्यामि इत्यर्थः । यद् ज्ञानम् अनुष्ठानपर्यन्तं ज्ञात्वामत्प्राप्तिविरोधिनः सर्वस्माद् अशुभात् मोक्ष्यसे ।  1 । The Sovereign Science and Sovereign SecretIn the eighth chapter the details connected with the differences prevailingamong the various kinds of devotees have been expounded. Now the nature of Upasana, which takes the form of Bhakti, is explained after investigating the eminence of the Supreme Person who is the object ofadoration. The superiority of the Jnanin is also elaborated.I will declare to you, who does not cavil, this most mysterious knowledge called Upasana, which is of the nature of Bhakti, together with special knowledge, namely, the distinguishing knowledge of how it differs from other meditations. The import is this: You have heard of My eminence, which is distinct in kind from all other forms of greatnessand is unlimited in its modes, You must have been convinced that it can be so only and not otherwise. To you whose mind is thus prepared, I shall declare that knowledge by acquiring which, and making which your way of life, you will be emancipated from all evil that hinders you from attaining Me.  
277 राजविद्या विद्यानां राजगुह्यं गुह्यानां राजा; राज्ञां विद्येति वा राजविद्या, राजानो हि विस्तीर्णागाधमनसः, महामनसाम् इयं विद्या इत्यर्थः ।महामनस एव गोपनीयगोपनकुशला इति तेषाम् एव गुह्यम् इदम् । उत्तमम् पवित्रं मत्प्राप्तिविरोध्यशेषकल्मषापहं प्रत्यक्षावगमम्, अवगम्यते इति अवगमो विषयः, प्रत्यक्षभूतःअवगमो विषयो यस्य ज्ञानस्य तत् प्रत्यक्षावगमम्, भक्तिरूपेण उपासनेन उपास्यमानः अहं तदानीम् एव उपासितुः प्रत्यक्षताम् उपागतो भवामि इत्यर्थः ।अथापि धर्म्यं धर्माद् अनपेतं धर्मत्वं हि निःश्रेयससाधनत्वम्, स्वरूपेण एव अत्यर्थप्रियत्वेनतदानीम् एव मद्दर्शनापादनतया च स्वयं निःश्रेयसरूपम् अपि निरतिशयनिःश्रेयसरूपात्यन्तिक-मत्प्राप्तिसाधनम् इत्यर्थः । अत एव सुसुखं कर्तुं सुसुखोपादानम्, अत्यर्थप्रियत्वेन उपादेयम्;अव्ययम् अक्षयं मत्प्राप्तिं साधयित्वा अपि स्वयं न क्षीयते । एवंरूपम् उपासनं कुर्वतो मत्प्रदानेकृते अपि न किंचित् कृतं मया अस्य इति मे प्रतिभाति इत्यर्थः । 2 । This is a 'royal science', the king among sciences; 'the royal mystery', the king among mysteries. Or royal science may also mean the science known and practised by kings.Indeed kings are those who have broad and profound minds. This is a mystery, because the great-minded aloneare skilled in keeping mysteries. This is 'supreme purifier'; for it removescompletely all blemishes opposed to the attainment of Myself. It is realised by 'direct perception'. 'Avagama' is that which is apprehended - the subject of knowledge. It is that knowledge which has become direct perception, so that its object is directly apprehended. The import is that I, when worshipped in the spirit of Bhakti, become perceptible to the worshipper immediately. Even so, it is in 'accord with Dharma' or inseparable from Dharma. What is called Dharma is that which constitutes the means for the highest good. Though it is of the nature of supreme good, as it brings about the vision of Myself, yet it is also the means for completely attaining Me, which is the end unsurpassed and the final good. Because of this, it is 'pleasurable' to practise; its adoption is a matter of supreme love. It is 'abiding', imperishable. It does not perish even after leading to My attainment. That is, I give Myself up to one who performsthis form of worship; even then it appears to Me that I have done nothingfor him. Such is the meaning.  
278 अस्य उपासनाख्यस्य धर्मस्य निरतिशयप्रियमद्विषयतया स्वयं निरतिशयप्रियरूपस्यपरमनिःश्रेयसस्वरूपमत्प्राप्तिसाधनस्य अव्ययस्य उपादानयोग्यदशां प्राप्य अश्रद्दधानाः विश्वासपूर्वकत्वरारहिताः पुरुषाः माम् अप्राप्य मृत्युरूपे संसारवर्त्मनि नितरां  वर्तन्ते । अहो! महद् इदम् आश्चर्यम् इत्यर्थः । 3 । Some men who even after attaining the state fit for the practice of this Dharma which is called Upasana (worship) - which is immensely dear in as much as it has for its goal Myself who am incomparably dear, and which is the means for the attainment of Myself forming the supremegood that does not perish - may still 'lack faith' in it. Such persons who lack faith which requires eagerness for realization, will not attain Me but remain in the mortal pathway of Samsara. O how strange it is - this hindrance caused by evil Karma! Such is the meaning. (It means, that to declare that one has faith in a spiritual doctrine and yet to take no steps to put it into practice, is pure hypocrisy].  
279 शृणु तावत् प्राप्यभूतस्य मम अचिन्त्यमहिमानम् -इदं चेतनाचेतनात्मकं कृत्स्नं जगद् अव्यक्तमूर्तिना अप्रकाशितस्वरूपेण मया अन्तर्यामिणा ततम् ।अस्य जगतो धारणार्थं नियमनार्थम् च शेषित्वेन व्याप्तम् इत्यर्थः । यथा अन्तर्यामिब्राह्मणे 'यः पृथिव्यां तिष्ठन् ... यं पृथिवी न वेद' (बृ0 उ0 3।7।3) 'य आत्मनि तिष्ठन् ... यमात्मा न वेद' (श0 प0 ब्रा0 14।6।5।5।30) इति चेतनाचेतनवस्तुजातैः अदृष्टेन अन्तर्यामिणा तत्र तत्र व्याप्तिः उक्ता ।ततो मत्स्थानि सर्वभूतानि सर्वाणि भूतानि मयि अन्तर्यामिणि स्थितानि, तत्र एव ब्राह्मणे 'यस्य पृथिवी शरीरं यः पृथिवीमन्तरो यमयति' (बृ0 उ0 3।7।3) 'यस्यात्मा शरीरं य आत्मानमन्तरो यमयति' (श0 प0 ब्रा0 14।6।6।5।30) इति शरीरत्वेन नियाम्यत्वप्रतिपादनात् । तदायत्ते स्थितिनियमने प्रतिपादिते शेषित्वं च, न च अहं तेषु अवस्थितः अहं तु न तदायत्तस्थितिः, मत्स्थितौ तैः न कश्चित् उपकार इत्यर्थः । 4 । Listen then to the inconceivable glory of Myself, who am the goal to be attained:This 'entire universe,' composed of sentient and non-sentient beings, is pervaded by Me, the inner controller, whose 'form is not manifest,' namely, whose essential nature is unmanifest. The meaning is that all this is pervaded by Me, the Principal (Seshi), so that I may sustain and rule this universe. This, the pervasion of all by the inner controller, who is invisible to the entire group of sentient and non-sentient beings, is taught in the following passage of the Antaryami-brahmana: 'He who dwells in the earth, , ...whom the earth does not know' (Br.U.3.7.3) and'He who dwells in the self. ., whom the self does not know etc.,' (Br.U.Madh" 3.7.22). Therefore 'all beings abide in Me'; all beings rest in Me who am their inner controller. In the same Brahmana it is taught that their existence and control are dependent on Him, as they are subjectto His control and as they constitute His body: 'He whose body is the earth who controls the earth from within' (Br.U.3.7.3) and 'He whose body is the self. He who controls the self from within' (Br.U.Madh.3.7.22). So also His primacy over everything is taught. 'I am not in them, namely, I do not 'depend' on them for My existence. There is no help derived from them for My existence.  
280 न च मत्स्थानि भूतानि न घटादीनां जलादेः इव मम धारकत्वम्, कथम् ? मत्संकल्पेन । पश्य मम ऐश्वरं योगम् अन्यत्र कुत्रचिद् असंभवनीयं मदसाधारणम् आश्चर्यं योगं पश्य ।कः असौ योगः? भूतभृन्न च भूतस्थो ममात्मा भूतभावनः । सर्वेषां भूतानां भर्ता अहं न च तैः कश्चिद् अपि मम उपकारः । मम आत्मा एव भूतभावनः, मम मनोमयः संकल्प एव भूतानां भावयिता नियन्ता च । 5 । And yet 'beings do not abide in Me,' as I do not support them as a jug or any kind of vessel supports the water contained in them. How then are they contained? By My will. Behold My divine Yoga power, namely, My wonderful divine modes, unique to Me alone and having no comparison elsewhere. What are these modes? 'I am the upholder of all beings and yet I am not in them - My will sustains all beings.' The meaning is I am the supporter of all beings, and yet I derive no help for Myself whatever from them. My will alone projects, sustains and controls all beings.  
281 सर्वस्य अस्य स्वसंकल्पायत्तस्थितिप्रवृत्तित्वे  निदर्शनम् आह-यथा आकाशे अनालम्बने महान् वायुः स्थितः सर्वत्र गच्छति । स तु वायुः निरालम्बनोमदायत्तस्थितिः इति अवश्याभ्युपगमनीयो मया एव धृत इति विज्ञायते तथा एव सर्वाणि भूतानि तैः अदृष्टे मयि स्थितानि मया एव धृतानि इति उपधारय ।यथा आहुः वेदविदः- 'मेघोदयः सागरसन्निवृत्तिरिन्दोर्विभागः स्फुरितानि वायोः। विद्युद्विभङ्गो गतिरुष्णरश्मेर्विष्णोर्विचित्राः प्रभवन्ति मायाः ।।' (?) इति विष्णोः अनन्यसाधारणानि महाश्चर्याणि इत्यर्थः । श्रुतिः अपि - 'एतस्य वा अक्षरस्य प्रशासने गार्गि सूर्याचन्द्रमसौ विधृतौ तिष्ठतः' (बृ0 उ0 3।8।1) 'भीषास्माद्वातः पवते । भीषोदेति सूर्यः । भीषास्मादग्निश्चेन्द्रश्च ।मृत्युर्धावति पञ्चमः' (तै0 उ0 2।8।1) इत्यादिका । 6 । He gives an illustration to show how all beings depend on His will for their being and acts:The 'powerful air' remains and moves everywhere in the ether (Akasa) without any perceivable support. So it has necessarily got to be admitted that the powerful air is dependent on Me for its existence and is being upheld by Me alone. Even so know that all entities abide in Me, who aminvisible to them, and that they are upheld by Me alone. The knowers of the Veda, declare thus: 'The origin of clouds, the waters of the ocean remaining within bounds, the phases of the moon, the strong movementsof the gale, the flash of lightning and the movements of the sun - all these are marvellous manifestations of the power of Vishnu'. The meaning is that they are all the marvellous miracles which are unique to Vishnu. The Srutis and other texts also declare likewise: 'Verily, O Gargi, at the command of that Imperishable One, the sun and the moon stand apart' (Br.U.3.8.9), and 'Through the fear of Him the wind blows,through the fear of Him the sun rises, through the fear of Him Agni and Indra perform their duties' (Tai.U.2.8.1).  
282 सकलेतरनिरपेक्षस्य भगवतः संकल्पात् सर्वेषां स्थितिः प्रवृत्तिः च उक्ता; तथा तत्संकल्पाद्एव सर्वेषाम् उत्पत्तिप्रलयौ अपि, इति आह - स्थावरजङ्गमात्मकानि सर्वाणि भूतानि मामिकां मच्छरीरभूतां प्रकृतिं तमः शब्दवाच्यां नामरूपविभागानर्हां कल्पक्षये चतुर्मुखावसानसमये मत्संकल्पाद् यान्ति । तानि एव भूतानि कल्पादौ पुनः विसृजामि अहम् । यथा आह मनुः - 'आसीदिदं तमोभूतम्' (मनु0 1।5) 'सोऽभिध्याय शरीरात् स्वात्' (मनु0 1।8) इति । श्रुतिरपि - 'यस्याव्यक्तं शरीरम्' (सु0 उ0 7) इत्यादिका 'अव्यक्तमक्षरे लीयते अक्षरं तमसि लीयते, तमः परे देवे एकीभवति' (सु0 उ0 2) 'तम आसीत्तमसा गूढमग्रेऽप्रकेतम्' (ऋ0 सं0 8।7।17।3) इति च । 7 । It has been declared that the existence and acts of all beings originate by the will of the Lord, who is independent of all others. Now Sri Krshna declares that the origin and dissolution of all entities also are due to His will only:All the mobile and immobile entities enter into My Prakrti at the end of a cycle, namely at the end of Brahma's life in accordance with My will. This Prakrti, constituting My body, is designated by the term Tamas, as it cannot be differentiated into name and form. I again send forth the very same beings at the beginning of a cycle. Manu declaresaccordingly: 'This universe became Tamas. ...by an act of will. He produced it out of His body' (Manu, 1.5.8). The Srutis also declare thus: 'He whose body is Avyakta' (Su.U., 7); 'The Avyakta merges into Akshara, the Akshara into Tamas' (Ibid., 2); and also 'There was Tamas;the intellegence was concealed by Tamas' (Tai.Br., 2.8.9).  
283 स्वकीयां विचित्रपरिणामिनीं प्रकृतिम् अवष्टभ्य अष्टधा परिणमय्य इमं चतुर्विधं देवतिर्यङ्मनुष्यस्थावरात्मकं भूतग्रामं मदीयाया मोहिन्याः गुणमय्याः प्रकृतेः वशात् अवशं पुनः पुनः काले काले विसृजामि । 8 । Operating My Prakrti, with its wonderfully variegated potency, I develop it eightfold and send forth this fourfold aggregate of beings, gods, animals, men and inanimate things, time after time. All these entities are helpless, being under the sway of My Prakrti comprising the three Gunas which can cause delusion.  
284 एवं तर्हि विषमसृष्ट्यादीनि कर्मणि नैर्घृण्याद्यापादनेन भगवन्तं बध्नन्ति इति, अत्र आह -न च तानि विषमसृष्ट्यादीनि कर्माणि मां निबध्नन्ति मयि नैर्घृण्यादिकं न आपादयन्ति, यतः क्षेत्रज्ञानां पूर्वकृत्यानि एव कर्माणि देवादिविषमभावहेतवः; अहं तु तत्र वैषम्ये असक्तः तत्र उदासीनवद् आसीनः । यथा आह सूत्रकारः - 'वैषम्यनैर्घृण्ये न सापेक्षत्वात्' (ब्र0 सू0 2।1।34)'न कर्माविभागादिति चेन्नानादित्वात्' (ब्र0 सू0 2।1।35) इति । 9 । If this is so, it may be urged, inequalities of creation can be said to affectthe Lord with cruelty, partiality etc. To this, the Lord answers:But actions like unequal creation do not bind Me. There can be no imputation of cruelty etc., to Me, because the previous actions (Karmas) of individual selves are the causes for the inequality of conditions like that of gods etc. I am untouched by the inequality. I sit, as it were, apartfrom it as one unconcerned. Accordingly, the author of the Vedanta-sutras says: 'Not inequality and cruelty, on account of (creation) being dependent, for so scripture declares' (Br.Su.2.1.34), and 'If it be said that there is no Karma on account of non-distinction, it is replied that it is notproper to say so, because it is beginningless. ..' (Ibid. ,2.1.35). [The idea is this: Creation has no first beginning. It is an eternal cyclic process of creation and dissolution of the universe. So the differentiation of Karma, Jiva and Isvara even before creation has to be accepted. Only in the creative cycle the differentiation becomes patent, and in the dissolved condition it remains latent].  
285 तस्मात् क्षेत्रज्ञकर्मानुगुणं मदीया प्रकृतिः सत्यसंकल्पेन मया अध्यक्षेण ईक्षिता सचराचरं जगत् सूयते, अनेन क्षेत्रज्ञकर्मानुगुणमदीक्षणेन हेतुना जगद् विपरिवर्तते; इति मत्स्वाम्यं सत्यसंकल्पत्वं नैर्घृण्यादिदोषरहितत्वम् इत्येवमादिकं मम वसुदेवसूनोः ऐश्वरं योगं पश्य । यथा श्रुतिः - 'अस्मान्मायी सृजते विश्वमेतत्तस्मिंश्चान्यो मायया संनिरुद्धः ।' 'मायां तु प्रकृतिं विद्यात् मायिनं तु महेश्वरम्' (श्वेता0 4।9-10) इति । 10 । Therefore, My Prakrti, looked at by Me, through My will and under My supervision creates the world with its mobile and immobile beings in accordance with the Karma of individual selves. Because of this, namely, My look at Prakrti in conformity with the Karma of individual selves, the world revolves. Behold in this wonderful phenomena thelordly power inherent to Me, the son of Vasudeva, such as My sovereignty, true resolve and being devoid of cruelty and similar blemishes! So declare the Srutis: 'The possessor of Maya projects this universe out of this. The other (i.e., individual self) is confined by Maya in the world. One should know the Maya to be the Prakrti. And the possessor of Maya to be the Mighty Lord' (Sve.U.4.9.10).  
286 एवं मां भूतमहेश्वरं सर्वज्ञं सत्यसंकल्पं निखिलजगदेककारणं परमकारुणिकतया सर्वसमाश्रयणीयत्वाय मानुर्षी तनुम् आश्रितं स्वकृतैः पापकर्मभिः मूढा अवजानन्ति - प्राकृतमनुष्यसमं मन्यन्ते । भूतमहेश्वरस्य मम अपारकारुण्यौदार्यसौशील्यवात्सल्यादिनिबन्धनं मनुष्यत्वसमाश्रयणलक्षणम् इमं परं भावम् अजानन्तो मनुष्यत्वसमाश्रयणमात्रेण माम् इतरसजातीयं मत्वा तिरस्कुर्वन्ति इत्यर्थः । 11 । Because of their evil actions (Karmas), fools disregard Me - the great Lord of all beings, the Omniscient, whose resolves are true, who is the sole cause of the entire universe, and who has taken the human body out of great compassion so that I might become the refuge of all. They consider Me to be a man like themselves: The meaning is that they disregard Me, not knowing My higher nature which is an abode of compassion, generosity, condescension and parental solicitude. This nature of mine is the cause of My resorting to the human shape. But without understanding this, the ignorant consider Me as of the same nature as others, because I have assumed the human form.  
287 मम मनुष्यत्वे परमकारुण्यादिपरत्वतिरोधानकरीं राक्षसीम् आसुरीं च मोहिनीं प्रकृतिम् आश्रिताः, मेघाशाः मोघवाञ्छिता निष्फलवाञ्छिताः, मोघकर्माणः मोघारम्भाः, मोघज्ञानाः सर्वेषु मदीयेषु चराचरेषु अर्थेषु मयि च विपरीतज्ञानतया निष्फलज्ञानाः; विचेतसः तथा सर्वत्र विगतयाथात्म्यज्ञानाः, मां सर्वेश्वरम् इतरसमं मत्वा मयि यत् कर्तुम् इच्छन्ति, यद् उद्दिश्य आराम्भान् कुर्वते, तत् सर्वं मोघं भवति इत्यर्थः । 12 । Men yielding to the deluding nature characteristics of Asuras and Rakshas and not aware of My higher nature like compassion etc. when I am in a human form, are possessed of vain hopes, i.e, their hopes remain fruitless, of vain acts, i.e., their enterprises remain fruitless and their knowledge also is vain, i.e., is fruitless. They are so because of their erroneous understanding which fails to know that all things, mobile and immobile, belong to Me. They are ignorant on account of their beingdevoid of knowledge of truth everywhere. Whatever they do regarding Me, the Lord of all, is done with an attitude that I am an ordinary mortal. So their efforts go in vain. All this springs from their partaking of the nature of Rakshasas and Asuras.  
288 ये तु स्वकृतैः पुण्यसञ्चयैः मां शरणम् उपगम्य विध्वस्तसमस्तपापबन्धाः दैवीं प्रकृतिम् आश्रिताः महात्मानः ते, भूतादिम् अव्ययं वाङ्मनसागोचरनामकर्मस्वरूपं परमकारुणिकतया साधुपरित्राणाय मनुष्यत्वेन अवतीर्णं मां ज्ञात्वा अनन्यमनसः मां भजन्ते, मत्प्रियत्वातिरेकेण मद्भजनेन विना मनसाः च आत्मनः च बाह्यकरणानां च धारणम् अलभमानाः, मद्भजनैकप्रयोजनाः भजन्ते । 13 । Those who, through their multitude of good acts, have taken refuge in Me and have been thereby released from the bondage of evil - they understand My divine nature. They are high-souled. Knowing Me to be the immutable source of all beings, namely, as the Lord whose name, acts and nature are beyond thought and speech, and who has descended in a human form out of supreme compassion to rescue the good, - they worship Me with un unswerving mind. As I am extremely dear to them,without worshipping Me they are unable to find support for their mind, self and external organs. Thus they become devoted to Me as their sole object.  
289 अत्यर्थं मत्प्रियत्वेन मत्कीर्तनयतननमस्कारैः विना क्षणाणुमात्रे अपि आत्मधारणम् अलभमानाः मद्गुणविशेषवाचीनि मन्नामानि स्मृत्वा पुलकितसर्वाङ्गाः, हर्षगद्गदकण्ठाः श्रीरामनारायण-कृष्णवासुदेवेत्येवमादीनि सततं कीर्तयन्तः तथा एव यतन्तः मत्कर्मसु अर्चनादिकेषु वन्दनस्तवन-करणादिकेषु तदुपकारकेषु भवननन्दनवनकरणादिकेषु च दृठसंकल्पाः यतमानाः, भक्तिभारावनमितमनोबुद्ध्यभिमानपदद्वयकरद्वयशिरोभिः अष्टाङ्गैः अचिन्तितपांसुकर्द्दम-शर्करादिके धरातले दण्डवत् प्रणिपतन्तः, सततं मां नित्ययुक्ताः नित्ययोगम् आकाङ्रक्षमाणा आत्मवन्तो मद्दास्यव्यवसायिनः उपासते । 14 । Because of My being very dear to them, they are unable to find support for their souls even for a moment without 'singing My praises,' 'striving for My sake and bowing to Me in reverence.' Remembering My names connotative of My special attributes, they cry out My names - Narayana,Krshna, Vasudeva etc., with horripilations in every part of their bodies and with their voices tremulous and indistinct, because of joy. They engage in activities for my sake, such as performing worship, and doing actions helpful to worship, like building temples and cultivating temple gardens. They prostrate themselves on the earth like a stick, indifferent to dust, mud and the gravel, with all the eight members of their beings - the Manas, Buddhi, Ahankara, the two feet, two hands, and the head, which are bowed down under the influence of Bhakti. Aspiring for eternal communion with Me, desiring eternal union With Me, they worship Me, resolved to attain the state of servitude to Me for their entire being.  
290 अन्ये अपि महात्मानः पूर्वोक्तैः कीर्तनादिभिः ज्ञानाख्येन यज्ञेन च यजन्तः माम् उपासते, कथम्? बहुधा पृथक्त्वेन जगदाकारेण विश्वतोमुखं विश्वप्रकारम् अवस्थितं माम् एकत्वेन उपासते । एतद् उक्तं भवति - भगवान् वासुदेव एव नामरूपविभागानर्हातिसूक्ष्मचिदचिद्वस्तुशरीरः सन् सत्यसंकल्पः विविधविभक्तनामरूपस्थूलचिदचिद्वस्तुशरीरः स्याम् इति संकल्प्य स एकदेव एव तिर्यङ्मनुष्यस्थावराख्यविचित्रजगच्छरीरः अवतिष्ठते इति अनुसंदधानाश्च माम् उपासते इति । 15 ।  Other high-minded persons worship Me by singing My names, etc., already described; and they also perform the sacrifice called knowledge. They worship Me, who, by being 'characterised by diversity in various ways' in the form of the cosmos, is a multiform, namely, having allentities as modes (Prakaras) and also as One (the Prakari). The purport is this: The lord Vasudeva alone, having the body comprising animate and inanimate entities in an extremely subtle form (in the state of Cosmic dissolution) incapable of distinctness by name and form, resolves by His unfailing true will power: 'May I become embodied in gross animate and inanimate entities, distinguished variously by name and form.' He alone then abides, with the variegated cosmos as His body, comprising gods, animals, men and immobile things. They worship Me by contemplating on Me thus.  
291 तथा हि विश्वशरीरः अहम् एव अवस्थितः, इति आह-अहं क्रतुः अहं ज्योतिष्टोमादिकक्रतुः अहम् एव यज्ञः महायज्ञः अहम् एव स्वधा पितृगण-पुष्टिदायिनी औषधं हविः च अहम् एव । अहम् एव च मन्त्रः अहम् एव आज्यम् । प्रदर्शनार्थम् इदम्, सोमादिकं च हविः अहम् एव इत्यर्थः । अहम् आहवनीयादिकः अग्निः होमश्च अहम् एव । 16 । Therefore Sri Krshna declares: 'I, having the universe for My body, alone abide'. I am the Kratu, namely, I am Jyotishtoma and other Vedicsacrifices. I alone am the Great Sacrifice (the fivefold sacrifices). I am the Svadha, the libation offered to nourish the hosts of manes. I am the herb, namely, oblation. I am the Mantra. I alone am the clarified butter. This implies other illustrations also. I alone am the oblation of Soma etc.Such is the meaning. I am the fire such as Ahavaniya etc. I am the act of offering into fire.  
292 अस्य स्थावरजङ्गमात्मकस्य जगतः तत्र तत्र पितृत्वेन मातृत्वेन धातृत्वेन पितामहत्वेन च वर्तमानः अहम् एव । अत्र धातृशब्दो मातृपितृव्यतिरिक्ते उत्पत्तियोजके चेतनविशेषे वर्तते । यत् किंचिद् वेद वेद्यं पवित्रं पावनं तद् अहम् एव । वेदकश्च, वेदबीजभूतः प्रणवः अहम् एव । ऋक्सामयजुरात्मको वेदश्च अहम् एव । 17 । Of the world consisting of mobile and immobile entities, I alone am the father, mother, creator and grandfather. Here the term Dhatr stands for one other than the parents who helps in the birth of a particular person. Whatever is known from the Vedas as purifying, I alone am that. I amthe Pranava, which originates knowledge and forms the seed of the Vedas. I am the Veda comprising Rk, Saman and Yajus.  
293 गम्यत इति गतिः, तत्र तत्र प्राप्यस्थानम् इत्यर्थः । भर्ता धारयिता, प्रभुः शासिता, साक्षी साक्षाद् द्रष्टा, निवासः वासस्थानं च वेश्मादि, शरणम् इष्टस्य प्रापकतया अनिष्टस्य निवारणतया समाश्रयणीयः चेतनः शरणम्, स च अहम् एव सुहृत् हितैषी, प्रभवप्रलयस्थानं यस्य कस्य यत्र कुत्रचित् प्रभवप्रलययोः यत् स्थानं तद् अहम् एव । निधानं निधीयत इति निधानम् उत्पाद्यम् उपसंहार्यं च अहम् एव इत्यर्थः । अव्ययं बीजं तत्र तत्र व्ययरहितं यत् कारणं तद् अहम् एव । 18 । 'Gatih' means that which is reached. The meaning is that it is the place to be reached from everywhere. The 'supporter' is one who props. The 'ruler' is one who rules. The 'witness' is one who sees directly. The 'abode' is that where one dwells in as in a house etc. The 'refuge' is the intelligent being who has to be sought, as he leads one to the attainment of desirable things and avoidance of evils. A 'friend' is one who wishes well. The 'base' is that place in which origin and dissolution takes place. I alone am that 'Nidhana', that which is preserved. What comes into being and is dissolved is Myself. The imperishable seed is that exhaustless cause everywhere. I alone am that.  
294 अग्न्यादित्यादिरूपेण अहम् एव तपामि, ग्रीष्मादौ अहम् एव वर्षं निगृह्णामि तथा वर्षासु अपि च अहम् एव उत्सृजामि । अमृतं च एव मृत्युः च येन जीवति लोको येन च म्रियते, तद् उभयम् अपि अहम् एव । किम् अत्र बहुना उक्तेन? सद् असत् च अपि अहम् एव । सद् यद् वर्तते, असद् यद् अतीतम् अनागतं च, सर्वावस्थावस्थितचिदचिद्वस्तुशरीरतया तत्तत्प्रकारः अहम् एव अवस्थित इत्यर्थः । एवं बहुधा पृथक्त्वेन विभक्तनामरूपावस्थितकृत्स्नजगच्छरीरतया तत्प्रकारः अहम् एव अवस्थित इति एकत्वज्ञानेन अनुसंदधानाः च माम् उपासत् ते एव महात्मानः । 19 । I send out 'heat' in the form of fire, the sun etc. I 'hold back' the rain during summer. Likewise, I pour out the rains during the rainy season. I am 'immortality as well as death' - I am both these conditions through which the world lives and dies. Why say more? I am 'the being and thenon-being'. Being is that which exists in the present time. Non-being is that which existed in the past and that which may exist in the future, but is not experienced now as existing. The meaning is that, I alone am existent, having all the entities for my modes, as all intelligent and inert beings existing in all states, constitute My body. In this way, they (the wise) worship Me, contemplating, through the realisation of My essential unity, as the entire universe distinguished by names and forms and characterised by varied pluralities constituting My body. I alone exist; all the pluralities are only My modes.  
295 एवं महात्मनां ज्ञानिनां भगवदनुभवैकभोगानां वृत्तम् उक्त्वा तेषाम् एव विशेषं दर्शयितुम् अज्ञानां कामकामानां वृत्तम् आह -ऋग्यजुः सामरूपाः तिस्रो विद्याः त्रिविद्यम्, केवलं त्रिविद्यनिष्ठाः त्रैविद्याः । न तु त्रय्यन्तं निष्ठाः, त्रय्यन्तनिष्ठा हि महात्मानः पूर्वोक्तप्रकारेण अखिलवेदवेद्यं माम् एव ज्ञात्वा अतिमात्रमद्भक्ति-कारितकीर्तनादिभिः ज्ञानयज्ञेन च मदेकप्राप्या माम् एव उपासते । त्रैविद्याः तु वेदप्रतिपाद्यकेवलेन्द्रादियागशिष्टसोमान् पिबन्तः पूतपापाः स्वर्गादिप्राप्तिविरोधि-पापात् पूताः तैः केवलेन्द्रादिदैवत्यतया अनुसंहितैः यज्ञैः वस्तुतः तद्रूपं माम् इष्ट्वा तथा अवस्थितं माम् अजानन्तः स्वर्गतिं प्रार्थयन्ते । ते पुण्यं दुःखासंभिन्नं सुरेन्द्रलोकं प्राप्य तत्र दिव्यान् देवभोगान् अश्नन्ति । 20 । Thus, after depicting the character of the noble-minded, whose enjoyment consists of only the experience of the Lord, and in order to bring into bolder relief their greatness, He describes the behaviour of ignorant men who covet the objects of desire.The three Vedas consist of the Rk, Yajus and Saman. The followers of the three Vedas are called 'Trai-vidyah', but they are not devoted to Vedanta (or Trayyanta). The great souls, who rely on Vedanta, know Me, as mentioned before, to be the only object to be known from all the Vedas. Considering Me as the highest object of attainment, they worship Me through singing My names etc., caused by deep devotion to Me, and also through the sacrifice of knowledge.But the followers of the three Vedas drink the Soma beverage, forming the remainder of sacrifices in honour of Indra and other divinities, as prescribed by the Vedas. They are thereby purified of evil that stand in the way of attainment of heaven. In these sacrifices, in which Indra etc., are regarded as divinities, they really worship Me in the forms of these divinities. They 'however' do not know that I abide in them in that way, and so they pray for the way to heaven etc. After attaining the world of Indra, which is free from unhappiness, they enjoy everywhere the divine pleasures.  
296 ते तं विशालं स्वर्गलोकं भुक्त्वा तदनुभवहेतुभूते पुण्ये क्षीणे पुनरपि मर्त्यलोकं विशन्ति । एवं त्रय्यन्तसिद्धज्ञानविधुराः काम्यस्वर्गादिकामाः केवलं त्रयीधर्मम् अनुप्रपन्नाः गतागतं लभन्ते । अल्पास्थिरस्वर्गादीन् अनुभूय पुनः निवर्तन्ते इत्यर्थः । 21 । After enjoying the spacious world of heaven, they return to the world of mortals when the meritorious Karma forming the cause of that experience is exhausted. Thus, lacking in the knowledge established in the Vedanta and desiring only the attainment of heaven etc., they who follow the teaching of the three Vedas on sacrificial rites, come and go.After enjoying the trifling and transient pleasures of heaven, they return to Samsara again and again.  
297 महात्मानः तु निरतिशयप्रियरूपं मच्चिन्तनं कृत्वा माम् अनवधिकातिशयानन्दं प्राप्य न पुनरावर्तन्ते इति तेषां विशेषं दर्शयति -अनन्याः अनन्यप्रयोजना मच्चिन्तनेन विना आत्मधारणालाभात् मच्चिन्तनैकप्रयोजनाः मां चिन्तयन्तो ये महात्मानः जनाः पर्युपासते सर्वकल्याणगुणान्वितं सर्वविभूतियुक्तं मां परित उपासते अन्यूनम् उपासते तेषां नित्याभियुक्तानां मयि नित्याभियोगं काङ्क्षमाणानाम् अहं मत्प्राप्तिलक्षणं योगम् अपुनरावृत्तिरूपं क्षेमं च वहामि । 22 । But the great souls meditating on Me, who am incomparably dear to them, attain boundless and unsurpassed bliss and do not return to Samsara. Sri Krshna describes their distinguishing features:There are Mahatmas who, excluding everything else and having no otherpurpose, meditate on me as their only purpose, because without Me they are unable to sustain themselves. They think of Me and worship Me with all My auspicious attributes and with all My glories. In the case of such devotees aspiring after eternal union with Me, I myself undertake the responsibility of bringing them to Myself (Yoga translated as 'prosperity') and of preserving them in that state for ever (Kshema translated as 'welfare'). The meaning is that they do not return to samsara.  
299 ये अपि अन्यदेवताभक्ताः ये तु इन्द्रादिदेवताभक्ताः केवलत्रयीनिष्ठाः श्रद्धया अन्विताः इन्द्रादीन् यजन्ते, तेऽपि पूर्वोक्तेन न्यायेन सर्वस्य मच्छरीरतया मदात्मत्वेन इन्द्रादिशब्दानां च मद्वाचित्वाद् वस्तुतो माम् एव यजन्ते अपि तु अविधिपूर्वकं यजन्ते । इन्द्रादीनां देवातानां कर्मसु आराध्यतया अन्वयं यथा वेदान्तवाक्यानि 'चतुर्होतारो यत्र संपदं गच्छन्ति देवैः' (तै0 आ0 4) इत्यादीनि विदधति, न तत्पूर्वकं यजन्ते । वेदान्तवाक्यजातं हि परमपुरुषशरीरतया अवस्थितानाम् इन्द्रादीनाम् आराध्यत्वं विदधद् आत्मभूतस्य परमपुरुषस्य एव साक्षाद् आराध्यत्वं विदधाति । चतुर्होतारः अग्निहोत्रदर्शपौर्णमासादीनि कर्माणि कुर्वाणा यत्र परमात्मनि आत्मतया अवस्थिते सति एव तच्छरीरभीतैः इन्द्रादिदेवैः संपदं गच्छन्ति, इन्द्रादिदेवानाम् आराधनानि एतानि कर्माणि मद्विषयाणि इति मां संपदं गच्छन्ति इत्यर्थः । 23 । Those, however, who are devoted to Indra and other divinities, who rely on the three Vedas alone, and who, possessed of faith, worship Indra and other divinities - they too worship Me actually in the light of the truth that all existing things constitute My body and have Me for their selves. In the light of this principle, terms like Indra denote Me only. The worshippers of Indra and other deities therefore worship Me only, in ways not sanctioned by the Sastras. They do not worship Indra and other divinities with a proper understanding of the place of these deities in the light of the Vedanta texts. An example is 'Wherein (i.e., inthe Supreme Self) the sacrifices known as the Caturhotri attain their fulfilment through the divinities' (Tai.Ar.3.10.4) etc. These texts say in what way these forms of worship apply to these divinities. For all Vedanta texts lay down that the Supreme Person alone is to be worshipped directly when they enjoin the worship of Indra and other divinities, as they form the body of the Supreme Person. The meaningis that in the Caturhotri sacrifice like Agnihotra, the full moon and the new moon sacrifices etc., it is the Supreme Self only that is worshipped, as He abides as the self in Indra etc., who are the ostensible objects worshipped in these sacrifices by which these worshippers obtain their fulfilment through them.  
300 अतः त्रैविद्या इन्द्रादिशरीरस्य परमपुरुषस्य आराधनानि एतानि कर्माणि, आराध्यः च स एव, इति न जानन्ति, ते च परिमितफलभागिनः च्यवनस्वभावाः च भवन्ति, तद् आह -प्रभुः एव च तत्र तत्र फलप्रदाता च अहम् एव इत्यर्थः । 24 । Therefore, the votaries of the three Vedas do not understand that these rituals form the worship of the Supreme Person and that He alone is to be worshipped. As they do not do so, they become experiencers of limited results, and they are again liable to fall into Samsara. Sri Krshna gives expression to this:I am 'the only Lord' - the meaning is that I  alone am the bestower of rewards everywhere.  
301 अहो महद् इदं वैचित्र्यं यद् एकस्मिन् एव कर्मणि वर्तमानाः संकल्पमात्रभेदेन केचिद् अत्यल्पफलभागिनः च्यवनस्वभावाः च भवन्ति, केतन अनवधिकातिशयानन्दपरमपुरुषप्राप्ति-रूपफलभागिनः अपुनरावर्त्तिनः च भवन्ति, इति आह -व्रतशब्दः संकल्पवाची, देवव्रताः दर्शपौर्णमासादिभिः कर्मभिः इन्द्रादीन् यजामः, इति इन्द्रादि-यजनसंकल्पाः, ये ते इन्द्रादिदेवान् यान्ति । ये च पितृयज्ञादिभिः पितॄन् यजामः, इति पितृयजनसंकल्पाः, ते पितॄन् यान्ति । ये च यक्षरक्षःपिशाचादीनि भूतानि यजामः, इति भूतयजनसंकल्पाः, ते भूतानि यान्ति । ये तु तैः एव यज्ञैः देवपितृभूतशरीरकं परमात्मानं भगवन्तं वासुदेवं यजामः इति मां यजन्ते ते मद्याजिनः माम् एव यान्ति । देवादिव्रता देवादीन् प्राप्य तैः सह परिमितं भोगं भुक्त्वा तेषां विनाशकाले तैः सह विनष्टा भवन्ति, मद्याजिनः तु माम् अनादिनिधनं सर्वज्ञं सत्यसंकल्पं अनवधिकातिशयासंख्येयकल्याण-गुणगणमहोदधिम् अनवधिकातिशयानन्दं प्राप्य न पुनः निवर्तन्ते इत्यर्थः । 25 ।  How wonderful is this, that though devoting themselves to the same kind of action, on account of the difference in intention some partake of a very small reward with the likelihood of fall, while some others partake of a reward in the form of attainment of the Supreme Person which is unalloyed, limitless, and incomparable!Sri Krshna explains this:The term 'Vrata' in the text denotes will, intention or motive. Those who intend to worship gods, like lndra and others with the resolution, 'Let us worship lndra and other gods by ceremonies like the new moon and full moon sacrifices' - such worshippers go to lndra and other gods.Those who intend worshipping manes, resolving 'Let us worship the manes through sacrifices,' - such worshippers go to the manes or others resolving - 'Let us worship theYakshas, Rakshasas, Pisacas and other evil spirits' they go to them. But those who, with the same rites of worship, worship Me with the intention, 'Let us worship Lord Vasudeva,the Supreme Self, whose body is constituted of gods, the manes and the evil spirits' - they are My worshippers and they reach Me only. Those who intend worshipping gods etc., attain gods etc. After sharing limited enjoyment with them, they are destroyed with them when the time comes for their destruction. But My worshippers attain Me, who has no beginning or end, who is omniscient, whose will is unfailingly effective, who is a great ocean of innumerable auspicious attributes of unlimited excellence and whose bliss too is of limitless excellence. They do not return to Samsara. Such is the meaning.  
302 मद्याजिनाम् अयम् अपि विशेषः अस्ति इति आह -सर्वसुलभं पत्रं वा पुष्पं वा फलं वा तोयं वा यो भक्त्या मे प्रयच्छति अत्यर्थमत्प्रियतया तत्प्रदानेन विना आत्मधारणम् अलभमानतया तदेकप्रयोजनो यो मे पत्रादिकं ददाति तस्य प्रयतात्मनः तत्प्रदानैकप्रयोजनत्वरूपशुद्धियुक्तमनसः तत् तथाविधभक्त्युपहृतम् अहं सर्वेश्वरो निखिलजगदुदयविभवलयलीलः अवाप्तसमस्तकामः सत्यसंकल्पः अनवधिकातिशयासंख्येय-कल्याणगुणगणः स्वाभाविकानवधिकातिशयानन्दस्वानुभवे वर्तमानः अपि, मनोरथपथदूरवर्ति प्रियं प्राप्य इव अश्नामि । यथा उक्तं मोक्षधर्मे - 'याः क्रियाः संप्रयुक्ताः स्युः एकान्तगतबुद्धिभिः । ताः सर्वाः शिरसा देवः प्रतिगृह्णाति  वै स्वयम् ।।' (महा0 शा0 340।64) इति । 26 । Sri Kshna continues to say, 'There is also another distinguishing characteristic of My worshippers.'Whoever offers to Me with true devotion a leaf, or a flower, or a fruit or water, which can be easily obtained, I accept it. That true devotion is love of such an exalted kindthat the devotee cannot sustain himself without making such offering; the devotee has no extraneous purpose other than serving Me. Such an offering coming from a heart rendered pure with that singleness of purpose of considering the offering as an end in itself - I, the Lord of the universe, whose sport consists in the origin, maintenance and dissolution of the entire world, who has all desires fulfilled, whose will is always accomplished, whose auspicious attributes are unlimited and unsurpassed,who is enjoying the infinite and unsurpassed bliss that is in Myself - I accept and enjoy the aforesaid type of offering, as if I was obtaining a desired object far beyond the range of My hopes. Thus it is declared in the Moksha-dharma: "Whatever acts are consecrated by those whose intellects are concentrated in single-pointed devotion, all these, the Lord Himself accepts on His head." (Ma.Bha.Sa.340.64)  
303 यस्माद् ज्ञानिनां महात्मनां वाङ्मनसागाचरः अयं विशेषः तस्मात् त्वं च ज्ञानी भूत्वा उक्तलक्षणभक्तिभारावनतात्मा आत्मीयः कीर्तनयतनार्चनप्रणामादिकं सततं कुर्वाणो लौकिकं वैदिकं च नित्यनैमित्तिकं कर्म च इत्थं कुरु इति आह-यत् देहयात्रादिशेषभूतं लौकिकं  कर्म करोषि, यत् च देहधारणाय अश्नासि, यत् च वैदिकं होमदानतपःप्रभृति नित्यनैमित्तिकं कर्म करोषि, तत् सर्वं मदर्पणं कुरुष्व । अर्प्यत इति अर्पणम्, सर्वस्य लौकिकस्य वैदिकस्य च कर्मणः कर्तृत्वं भोक्तृत्वं आराध्यत्वं च यथा मयि सर्वं समर्पितं भवति तथा कुरु । एतद् उक्तं भवति - यागदानादिषु आराध्यतया प्रतीयमानानां देवादीनां कर्म कर्तुः भोक्तुः तव च मदीयतया मत्संकल्पायत्तस्वरूपस्थितिप्रवृत्तितया च मयि एव परमशेषिणि परमकर्तरि त्वां च कर्तारं भोक्तारम् आराधकम् आराध्यं च देवताजातम् आराधनं च क्रियाजातं सर्वं समर्पय । तव मन्नियाम्यतापूर्वकमच्छेषतैकरसताम् आराध्यादेः च एतत्स्वभावकगर्भताम् अत्यर्थप्रीतियुक्तः अनुसंधत्स्व इति । 27 । Sri Krshna proceeds to say: As there is this distinctive excellence, incomprehensible by speech and mind in respect of these great men called the Jnanins, you also, following them, become a Jnanin, i.e., have your self and all your belongings 'bent down,' i.e., dedicated, under theweight of Bhakti as prescribed earlier. Be always singing My praises, doing My services, worshipping Me and prostrating before Me; also perform your secular and Vedic duties, periodical and occasional, in this manner.'Whatsoever worldly work you do for the sustenance of the body, whatsoever you set aside for the sustenance of the body, whatsoever Vedic acts, obligatory and occasional, like offerings, charity and austerity you practise - do all that as an offering to Me. 'Arpana' is offering. Do all acts, secular and Vedic, as if the doer, the enjoyer and the worshipped were all offerings to Me. The import is this: The divinities etc., w'ho are the objects of sacrificial worship, charities etc., and you, the agent and experiencer - all belong to Me and have their essence, existence and actions dependent on Me. Thus only to Me, the supreme Principal (Seshi) and supreme agent, offer every thing - yourselfas the agent, experiencer and worshipper, all the host of divinities who are the object of worship and the sum of actions constituting the worship.Actuated by overwhelming love, contemplate yourself and other factorssuch as the objects of worship, as dependent on Me as My Seshas, and hence as of a nature that finds delight only in subservience to Me.  
304 एवं संन्यासाख्ययोगयुक्तमना आत्मानं मच्छेषतामन्नियाम्यतैकरसं कर्म च सर्वं मदाराधनम् अनुसंदधानो लौकिकं वैदिकं च कर्म कुर्वन् शुभाशुभफलैः अनन्तैः प्राचीनकर्माख्यैः बन्धनैः मत्प्राप्तिविरोधिभिः सर्वैः मोक्ष्यसे, तैः विमुक्तो माम् एव उपैष्यसि । 28 । Thus, equipped with a mind which is firmly set in Yoga, called Sannyasa, considering yourself as one whose delight lies in being a subsidiary (Sesha) to Me and subject to My control and all acts to be My worship, and engaging your self in secular and Vedic actions with such an attitude, you will free yourself from countless bonds, called ancient Karmas, productive of auspicious and inauspicious results which stand as a hindrance preventing you from attaining Me. Freed from them, you shall come to Me only.  
305 मम इमं परमम् अतिलोकं स्वभावं शृणु -देवतिर्यङ्मनुष्यस्थावरात्मना स्थितेषु जातितः च आकारतः स्वभावतो ज्ञानतः च अत्यन्तोत्कृष्टापकृष्टरूपेण वर्तमानेषु सर्वेषु भूतेषु समाश्रयणीयत्वेन समः अहम्; अयं जात्याकारस्वभावज्ञानादिभिः निकृष्ट इति समाश्रयणे न मे द्वेष्यः अस्ति उद्वेदनीयतया न त्याज्यः अस्ति, तथा समाश्रितत्वातिरेकेण जात्यादिभिः अत्यन्तोत्कृष्टः अयम् इति तद्युक्ततया समाश्रयणे न कश्चित् प्रियः अस्ति न संग्राह्यः अस्ति । अपि त्तु अत्यर्थमत्प्रियत्वेन मद्भजनेन विना आत्मधारणालाभात् मद्भजनैकप्रयोजना ये मां भजन्ते ते जात्यादिभिः उत्कृष्टाः अपकृष्टा वा मत्समानगुणवद्यथासुखं मयि एव वर्तन्ते; अहम् अपि तेषु मदुत्कृष्टेषु इव वर्ते । 29 । Listen now, to My supreme nature which transcends the world:Being a refuge for all, I am the same to all creation, be they gods, animals, men or immovables, who exist differentiated from the highest to the lowest according to their birth, form, nature and knowledge. With regard to those seeking refuge, none is hateful because of inferiority instatus by birth, form, nature, knowledge etc. No one is discarded as an object of odium. Likewise, it is not that one who has resorted to Me is dear to Me on account of any consideration like birth, status etc. That he has taken refuge in Me is the only consideration. The meaning is no one is accepted as a refuge for reasons like birth. But those who worship Me as their sole objective I like, because I am exceedingly dear to them, and because they find it impossible to sustain themselves without My worship. So they abide in Me, irrespective of whether they are exalted or humble by birth etc. They abide in Me, as if they possess qualities equal to Mine. I also abide in them, as if they are My superiors.   
306 तत्र अपि तत्र तत्र जातिविशेषे जातानां यः समाचार उपादेयः परिहरणीयः च, तस्माद् अतिवृत्तः अपि उक्तप्रकारेण माम् अनन्यभाक् भजनैकप्रयोजनो भजते चेत् साधुः एव सः वैष्णवाग्रेसर एव मन्तव्यः, बहुमन्तव्यः पूर्वोक्तैः सम इत्यर्थः ।  कुत एतत्? सम्यग् व्यवसितो हि सः, यतः अस्य  व्यवसायः सुसमीचीनः । भगवान् निखिलजगदेककारणभूतः परब्रह्म नारायणः चराचरपतिः अस्मत्स्वामी मम गुरुः मम सुहृद् मम परं भोग्यम् इति सर्वैः दुष्प्रापः अयं व्यवसायः तेन कृतः, तत्कार्यं च अनन्यप्रयोजनं निरन्तरभजनं तस्य अस्ति, अतः साधुः एव बुहुमन्तव्यः । अस्मिन् व्यवसाये तत्कार्ये च उक्तप्रकारभजने संपन्ने सति तस्य आचारव्यतिक्रमः स्वल्पवैकल्यम् इति न तावता अनादरणीयः, अपि तु बहुमन्तव्य एव इत्यर्थः । 30 । Moreover:Even though he has transgressed rules that ought to be followed and has failed to avoid what a person belonging to a particular class should avoid,if he has begun to worship Me in the manner described above with undivided devotion, namely, with worship as the only purpose - such a person must be considered highly righteous. He is eminent among the worshippers of Vishnu. He must be esteemed as fit for honour. The meaning is that he is equal to those Jnanins mentioned earlier. What can be the reason for this? The reason is that, he has rightly resolved, i.e., his resolve is in the proper direction. 'The Lord who forms the sole causeof the entire universe, who is the Supreme Brahman, Narayana, the Lordof all mobile and immobile beings, is our Master, our Teacher, and our Friend, highest object of enjoyment,' such a resolve is difficult to be made by all. Its effect, unremitting worship which has no other purpose,will be found in him who makes such a resolve: Hence he is holy and is to be highly honoured. When this resolve, and unremitting worship which is its effect, are found in a person, he is not to be belittled; for, his transgression of rules is a negligible mistake compared to this kind of excellence. On the other hand he is to be regarded with high honour. Such is the meaning.  
307 ननु 'नाविरतो दुश्चरितान्नाशान्तो नासमाहितः । नाशान्तमानसो वापि प्रज्ञानेनैनमाप्नुयात् ।।' (क0 उ0 1।2।24) इत्यादिश्रुतेः आचारव्यतिक्रम उत्तरोत्तरभजनोत्पत्तिप्रवाहं निरुणद्धि इति अत्र आह -मत्प्रियत्वकारितानन्यप्रयोजनमद्भजनेन विधूतपापतया एव समूलोन्मूलितरजस्तमोगुणः क्षिप्रं धर्मात्मा भवति क्षिप्रम् एव विरोधिरहितसपरिकरमद्भजनैकमना भवति । एवंरूपभजनम् एव हि 'धर्मस्य अस्य परंतप ।' (9।3) इति उपक्रमे धर्मशब्दोदितः । शश्वच्छान्तिं निगच्छति । शाश्वतीम् अपुनरावर्तिनीं मत्प्राप्तिविरोध्याचारनिवृत्तिं गच्छति । कौन्तेय त्वम् एव अस्मिन् अर्थे प्रतिज्ञां कुरु मद्भक्तौ उपक्रान्तो विरोध्याचारमिश्रः अपि न नश्यति अपि तु मद्भक्तिमाहात्म्येन सर्वं विरोधिजातं नाशयित्वा शाश्वतीं विरोधिनिवृत्तिम् अधिगम्य क्षिप्रं परिपूर्णभक्तिः भवति । 31 । Now, if it be said that transgression of rules will annul the flow of worship, as declared in the Sruti passages like, 'One who has not ceased from bad conduct, is not tranquil, is not composed and also not calm in mind, cannot obtain Him through intelligence' (Ka.U.1.2.24), Sri Krshnareplies:Quickly he becomes righteous, the Gunas of Rajas and Tamas in him being eradicated with their roots, as he has shaken off all evils through the worship of Myself without any ulterior motive but only because of My being dear to him. Quickly he becomes one whose mind is speciallyattuned to My worship with all the ancillaries and having all the obstacles removed. It is this kind of worship which was alluded to by theterm, Dharma at the commencement of this chapter thus: 'Asraddhadhanah purushah dharmasyasya' etc., (9.3). Such a person obtains enduring peace, i.e., he attains to an eternal state, free from conduct contrary to the attainment of Myself, and from which there will be no return to Samsara. O Arjuna, you may affirm that one who has begun to worship Me in this way will not perish even though he is tarnished by some misconduct in the past. On account of his devotion to Me, he annihilates the entire host of obstacles. After obtaining eternal state of freedom from obstacles, he quickly obtains perfect Bhakti.  
308 स्त्रियो वैश्याः शूद्राः च पापयोनयः अपि मां व्यपाश्रित्य परां गतिं यान्ति । 32 । Women, Vaisyas and Sudras, and even those who are of sinful birth, can attain the supreme state by taking refuge in Me. How much more then the well-born Brahmanas and royal sages who are devoted to me! Therefore, royal sage that you are, do worship Me, as you have come to this transient and joyless world stricken by the threefold afflictions.  
309 किं पुनः पुण्ययोनयो ब्राह्मणाः राजर्षयः च मद्भक्तिम् आश्रिताः । अतः त्वं राजर्षिः अस्थिरं तापत्रयाभिहततया असुखं च इमं प्राप्य वर्तमानो मां भजस्व । 33 । Women, Vaisyas and Sudras, and even those who are of sinful birth, can attain the supreme state by taking refuge in Me. How much more then the well-born Brahmanas and royal sages who are devoted to me! Therefore, royal sage that you are, do worship Me, as you have come to this transient and joyless world stricken by the threefold afflictions.  
310 भक्तिस्वरूपम् आह -मन्मना भव मयि सर्वेश्वरे निखिलहेयप्रत्यनीककल्याणैकताने सर्वज्ञे सत्यसंकल्पे निखिल-जगदेककारणे परस्मिन् ब्रह्मणि पुरुषोत्तमे पुण्डरीकदलामलायतेक्षणे स्वच्छनीलजीमूतसंकाशे युगपदुदितदिनकरसहस्रसदृशतेजसि लावण्यामृतमहोदधौ उदारपीवरचतुर्बाहौ अत्युज्ज्वल-पीताम्बरे अमलकिरीटमकरकुण्डलहारकेयूरकटकादिभूषिते अपारकारुण्यसौशील्यसौन्दर्य-माधुर्यगाम्भीर्यौदार्यवात्सल्यजलधौ अनालोचितविशेषाशेषलोकशरण्ये सर्वस्वामिनि तैलधारावद् अविच्छेदेन निविष्टमना भव । तद् एव विशिनष्टि - मद्भक्तः अर्त्यथमत्प्रियत्वेन युक्तो मन्मना भव इत्यर्थः । पुनः अपि विशिनष्टि - मद्याजी अनवधिकातिशयप्रियमदनुभवकारितमद्यजनपरो भव । यजनं नाम परिपूर्णशेषवृत्तिः, औपचारिकसांस्पर्शिकाभ्यवहारिकादिसकलभोगप्रदानरूपो हि यागः । यथा मदनुभवजनितनिरवधिकातिशयप्रीतिकारितमद्यजनपरो भवसि तथा मन्मना भव इत्युक्तं भवति । पुनः अपि तद् एव विशिनष्टि - मां नमस्कुरु, अनवधिकातिशयप्रियमदनुभवकारितात्यर्थ-प्रियाशेषशेषवृत्तौ अपर्यवस्यन् मयि अन्तरात्मनि अतिमात्रप्रह्वीभावव्यवसायं कुरु । मत्परायणः अहम् एव परम् अयनं यस्य असौ मत्परायणः, मया विना आत्मधारणासंभावनया मदाश्रय इत्यर्थः । एवम् आत्मानं युक्त्वा मत्परायणः त्वम् एवम् अनवधिकातिशयप्रीत्या मदनुभवसमर्थं मनः प्राप्य माम् एव एष्यसि । आत्मशब्दो हि अत्र मनोविषयः । एवंरूपेण मनसा मां ध्यात्वा माम् अनुभूय माम् इष्ट्वा मां नमस्कृत्य मत्परायणो माम् एव प्राप्स्यसि इत्यर्थः । तद् एवं लौकिकानि शरीरधारणार्थानि वैदिकानि च नित्यनैमित्तिकानि कर्माणि मत्प्रीतये मच्छेषतैकरसो मया एव कारित इति कुर्वन् सततं मत्कीर्तनयजननमस्कारादिकान् प्रीत्या कुर्वाणो मन्नियाम्यं निखिलजगत् मच्छेषतैकरसम् इति च अनुसंदधानः, अत्यर्थप्रियमद्गुणगणं च अनुसंधाय अहरहः उक्तलक्षणम् इदम् उपासनम् उपादधानो माम् एव प्राप्स्यसि । 34 । Sri Krshna now describes the nature of Bhakti: Focus your mind on Me; fix your mind on Me umnterruptedly like a continuous stream of oil - on Me the Rulerof rulers, antagonistic to all that is evil, the sole abode of auspiciousness, omniscient, whose resolve is always true, the sole cause of the entire universe, the SupremeBrahman, the Supreme Person; on Me, of long large eyes like a lotus petal; who has the complexion of a clear blue cloud; whose shining lustre is like that of a thousand suns simultaneously risen; on Me, the great ocean of the nectar of beauty; of four arms, noble and strong, and of brilliant yellow raiment; on Me, adorned with a pure crown, fish-shaped ear-rings, garlands, bracelet on the arms and bangles at the wrist; on Me, the ocean of infinite mercy, affability, beauty, sweetness, majesty, magnanimity and parental affection; on Me, the refuge of all without exception and without regard to their differences; on Me, the Lord of all.Sri Krshna again makes the same clear. Be My devotee. Be one whose mind is focussed on Me by contemplating on Me as exceedingly dear. Such is the meaning. He makes this yet clearer. Be My worshipper, namely, become engaged in My worship, which you have begun to practise by your experience of Me as supremely dear and unlimited and unsurpassed. What is called worship is the conduct of one who realises that he is absolutely a subsidiary - (Sesha) of God. Worship consists also in offering all things of enjoyment such as waving of lights etc., all thosethings which come into bodily contact like garlands, sandal paste etc., and those meant for offering like food preparations and other edibles. The meaning is this: Let your mind be focussed on Me so as to be engaged in My worship, resulting from love which is unlimited and unsurpassed and which is born from the experience of Myself.Again Sri Krshna expounds the same: Bow down to Me. Do not be satisfied only with services of one who is absolutely subsidiary to me. Do services which are incomparably dear and animated by an experienceof Myself who is dear and unlimited and unsurpassed. Also bow down to Me in utter humility, regarding Me as the supreme goal, i.e., He who is the supreme abode and the supreme goal. The meaning is that having resorted to Me, it is impossible for you to live without Me. Having disciplined the mind in this way and considering Me as the supreme goal, you will thus, through love which is unsurpassed and incomparable, obtain a mind which is fit for experiencing Me. You will then reach Me alone. Here the term Atman stands for the mind. The import is that, holding Me as the sole support, possessing a mind of this kind, meditating on Me, experiencing Me, worshipping Me and bowing down to Me - you will reach Me alone. Thus, with such a turn of mind you carry on, for pleasing Me alone, your secular works for bodily sustenance and Vedic activities like obligatory and occasional rites, regarding them as actuated by Me and finding sole joy in absolute subservience to Me. You shall ever engage yourself in praising My names with love and in endeavouring to serve Me and bowing down to Me etc. You shall contemplate on the entire universe as being under My rule and being Subsidiary (Sesha) to Me. Contemplating on the multitudes of My attributes, which are exceedingly dear to you, and practising every day this worship as described, you will reach Me alone.  
