251 सप्तमे परस्य ब्रह्मणो वासुदेवस्य उपास्यस्य निखिलचेतनाचेतनाचेतनवस्तुशेषित्वं कारणत्वम् आधारत्वं सर्वशरीरतया सर्वप्रकारत्वेन सर्वशब्दवाच्यत्वं सर्वनियन्तृत्वं सर्वैश्च कल्याणगुणगणैः एकाश्रयत्वं तस्य एव परतरत्वं  च, सत्त्वजस्तमोमयैः देहेन्द्रियत्वेन भोग्यत्वेन च अवस्थितैः भावैः अनादिकालप्रवृत्तदुष्कृतप्रवाहहेतुकैः तस्य तिरोधानम्, अत्युत्कृष्टसुकृतहेतुकभगवत्प्रपत्त्या च तन्निवर्तनम्, सुकृततारतम्येन च प्रपत्तिवैशेष्याद् ऐश्वर्याक्षरयाथात्म्यभगवत्प्राप्त्यपेक्षया उपासकभेदम्, भगवन्तं प्रेप्सोः नित्ययुक्ततया एकभक्तितया च अत्यर्थपरमपुरुषप्रियत्वेन च श्रैष्ठ्यं दुर्लभत्वं च प्रतिपाद्य एषां त्रयाणां ज्ञातव्योपादेयभेदांश्च प्रास्तौषीत् ।इदानीम् अष्टमे प्रस्तुतान् ज्ञातव्योपादेयभेदान् विविनक्ति -अर्जुन उवाचजरामरणमोक्षाय भगवन्तम् आश्रित्य यतमानानां ज्ञातव्यतया उक्तं तद् ब्रह्म अध्यात्मं च कर्म च किम् इति वक्तव्यम् ऐश्वर्यार्थिनां ज्ञातव्यम् अधिभूतम् अधिदैवं च किं त्रयाणां ज्ञातव्यः अधियज्ञशब्दनिर्दिष्टश्च कः तस्य च अधियज्ञभावः कथं प्रयाणकाले च एभिः त्रिभिः नियतात्मभिः कथं ज्ञेयः असि । 1-2 । THE WAY TO IMPERISHABLE BRAHMANIn the seventh chapter, Sri Krshna taught that Vasudeva, the Supreme Brahman, is the object of worship. He taught His principalship in relation to all entities, animate and inanimate. His causality in relation to the entire universe; His being the support of all; His being denoted by all words as He has all entities for His body or modes; His controllershipof all; His supremacy over all on account of His multitude of auspicious attributes; His being concealed by Sattva, Rajas and Tamas in the form of bodies and senses and as the objects of experience arising from the stream of evil Karma coming down from beginningless time, and of the removal of this obscuration by resorting to the Lord through virtuous deeds. He also taught the gradation among the worshippers arising from differences in the fruits aspired for by them and produced by the relative proportions of good acts performed for wealth, for knowledge of the truenature of the individual self, and or the attainment of the Lord. He taughtthe greatness of the aspirant who attains the Lord on account of his beingdear to the Supreme Person, and for his being ever attached to the Lordthrough single-minded devotion. He referred to the rarity of such a devotee. Sri Krshna also mentioned the differences among the things thatshould be known and those that should be practised by the three classes of devotees.Now, in the eighth chapter, Sri Krshna gives a detailed description of certain principles and practices that have already been treated in brief earlier. What are that brahman, Adhyatma and Karma which have been mentioned as what should be known by those who aspire for release from old age and death while they take refuge with the Lord? What are Adhibhuta and Adhidaiva, which should be known by the aspirants forwealth? Who is Adhiyajna that is to be known by the three groups at their dying hour. In what manner are you to be known by these three groups who are self-controlled?  
252 श्रीभगवानुवाचतद् ब्रह्म इति निर्दिष्टं परमम् अक्षरं न क्षरति इति अक्षरं क्षेत्रज्ञं समष्टिरूपम्; तथा च श्रुतिः'अव्यक्तमक्षरे लीयते अक्षरं तमसि लीयते' (सु0 2) इत्यादिका । परमम् अक्षरं प्रकृति-विनिर्मुक्तात्मस्वरूपम् । स्वभावः अध्यात्मम् उच्यते स्वभावः प्रकृतिः अनात्मभूतम् आत्मनि संबद्ध्यमानं भूतसूक्ष्मतद्वासनादिकं पञ्चाग्निविद्यायां ज्ञातव्यतया उदितम्; तदुभयं प्राप्यतयात्याज्यतया च मुमुक्षुभिः ज्ञातव्यम् ।भूतभावो मनुष्यादिभावः, तदुद्भवकरो यो विसर्गः 'पञ्चम्यामाहुतावापः पुरुषवचसो भवन्ति' (छा0 उ0 5।3।3) इति श्रुतिसिद्धो योषित्संबन्धजः, स कर्मसंज्ञितः तत् च अखिलं सानुबन्धम् उद्वेजनीयतया परिहरणीयतया च मुमुक्षुभिः ज्ञातव्यम् । परिहरणीयता च अन्तरम् एव वक्ष्यते,'यदिच्छन्तो ब्रह्मचर्यं चरन्ति' (8।11) इति । 3 । That which is the Supreme Imperishable (Akshara) has been named 'that brahman'. The Akshara is that which can not be destroyed and forms the totality of all individual selves. The Srutis say to this effect: 'The Avyakta is dissolved into the Akshara, the Akshara is dissolved into Tamas' (Su. U. 2), The supreme Akshara is the essential form of the self, separated from Prakrti, One's own material nature (the body) is spoken of as Adhyatma or that which dwells with the self. This material nature (Svabhava) is Prakrti. It does not form the self but attaches itself to the self in the form of subtle elements, impressions etc. This has beentaught in the Vidya of Five Fires (Cha.U.5). Both these (the Akshara and the Adhyatma) should be known by the aspirants for liberation (Kaivalya) - the former as what should be attained and the latter as what should be relinquished.Karma is that force which produces the origination of mundane beings. 'Beings' here means beings such as the human beings. The creative force which produces their origination is contact with woman. It has been described in the Sruti passage thus: 'The waters sacrificed in the fifthoblations become those who are named Purushas' (Cha.U.5.3.3). That creative force is called Karma. All the acts associated with that should be considered by aspirants after release as calling for abstention. This abstention will also be inculcated immediately in the text, 'Desiring which they practise the vow of continence' (8.11).  
253 ऐश्वर्यार्थिनां ज्ञातव्यतया निर्दिष्टम् अधिभूतं क्षरो भावः वियदादिभूतेषु वर्तमानः तत्परिणाम-विशेषः क्षरणस्वभावो विलक्षणः साक्षयाः शब्दस्पर्शादिः साश्रयः, विलक्षणाः साश्रयाःशब्दस्पर्शरूपरसगन्धाः ऐश्वर्यार्थिभिः प्राप्याः, तैः अनुसंधेयाः ।पुरुषश्च अधिदैवतम् अधिदैवतशब्दनिर्दिष्टः पुरुषः, अधिदैवतं दैवतोपरि वर्तमानम्इन्द्रजापतिप्रभृतिकृत्स्नदैवतोपरि वर्तमानः, इन्द्रप्रजापतिप्रभृतीनां भोग्यजाताद् विलक्षणशब्दादेःभोक्ता पुरुषः, सा च भोक्तृत्वावस्था ऐश्वर्यार्थिभिः प्राप्यतया अनुसन्धेया ।अधियज्ञः अहम् एव अधियज्ञशब्दनिर्दिष्टः अहम् एव, अधियज्ञः यज्ञैः आराध्यतया वर्तमानः,अत्रेन्दादौ मम देहभूते आत्मतया अवस्थितः अहम् एव यज्ञैः आराध्य इति महायज्ञादिनित्य-नैमित्तिकानुष्ठानवेलायां त्रयाणाम् अधिकारिणाम् अनुसन्धेयम् एतत् । 4 । The perishable existences which have been declared as fit to be known by the seekers of wealth, power etc., form the Adhibhuta. They are superior material entities that remain in ether or space and other elements. They are the evolutes of material elements and are perishable in their nature. They are also of the nature of sound, touch etc., supportedby their basic subtle elements but different from, and finer than, ordinarysound etc., and are of many kinds. Sound, touch, form, taste and smell of this kind, which are manifold and rooted in their several bases, are to be gained by the seekers after prosperity and should be contemplatedupon by them.Adhidaivata connotes Purusha. The Purusha is superior to divinities like Indra, Prajapati and others, and is the experiencer of sound etc., which are different from; and superior to, the multitude of enjoyments of Indra,Prajapati etc. The condition of being such an enjoyer is to be contemplated upon by the seekers after prosperity, as the end to be attained.I alone am connoted by the term Adhiyajna (sacrifice). Adhiyajna denotes one who is propitiated in sacrifices. Indra and others, to whom sacrifices are made, form My body. I dwell as their Self and I alone am the object of worship by sacrifice. In this manner the three groups of qualified devotees should contemplate at the time of the practice of periodical and occasional rituals like the great sacrifices.  
254 इदमपि त्रयाणां साधारणम् -अन्तकाले च माम् एव स्मरन् कलेवरं त्यक्त्वा यः प्रयक्त्वा यः प्रयाति स मद्भावं याति ।मम यो भावः स्वभावः तं याति, तदानीं यथा माम् अनुसन्धत्ते तथाविधाकारो भवति इत्यर्थः ।यथा आदिभरतादयः तदानीं स्मर्यमाणमृगसजातीयाकाराः संभूताः । 5 । This is also common to all the three groups of devotees.He who, at the last moment, while leaving the body, departs remembering Me alone, attains My being; he attains My condition. In whatever way he meditates on Me, he attains that very form, in the same manner as the royal sage Bharata attained the form of the deer remembered by him at death. Such is the meaning.  
255 स्मर्तुः स्वविषयसजातीयाकारतापादनम् अन्त्यप्रत्ययस्य स्वभाव इति सुस्पष्टम् आह -अन्ते अन्तकाले यं यं वा अपि भावं स्मरन् कलेवरं त्यजति तं तं भावम् एव मरणान्तरम् एति ।अन्त्यप्रत्ययश्च पूर्वभावितविषय एव जायते । 6 । Sri Krshna further elucidates that it is the nature of one's last thought that leads to the attainment of a similar form by the meditator:At the end,' at the time of death, remembering whatsoever thought one abandons the body, to that alone one goes after death. The final thought arises only with reference to objects previously ruminated upon in one's thought.  
256 यस्मात् पूर्वकालाभ्यस्तविषये एव अन्त्यप्रत्ययो जायते -तस्मात् सर्वेषु कालेषु  आप्रयाणाद् अहरहः माम् अनुस्मर अहरहः अनुस्मृतिकरं युद्धादिकंवर्णाश्रमानुबन्धिश्रुतिस्मृतिचोदितनित्यनैमित्तिकं च कर्म कुरु । एतदुपायेन मय्यर्पितमनोबुद्विःअन्तकाले च माम् एव स्मरन् यथाभिलषितप्रकारं मां प्राप्स्यसि न अत्र संशयः । 7 । As the final thought results only about an object previously contemplatedupon,Therefore, at all times, until your departure, remember Me, day after day. Engage yourself in actions appropriate to your station and stage in life, which would make you remember Me. These actions are prescribed by the Srutis and Smrtis and comprise the periodical and occasional rites. Thus, by this means, with your mind andintellect set on Me, you will remember Me at the time of death and thus attain to Me in the manner desired by you. There is no doubt about this.  
257 एवं सामान्येन सर्वत्र स्वप्राप्यावाप्तिः अन्त्यप्रत्ययाधीना इति उक्त्वा तदर्थं त्रयाणाम् उपासनप्रकारभेदं वक्तुम् उपक्रमते । तत्र ऐश्वर्यार्थिनाम् उपासनप्रकारं यथोपासनम् अन्त्यप्रत्ययकारकं च आह -अहरहः अभ्यासयोगाभ्यां युक्ततया नान्यगामिना चेतसा अन्तकाले परमं पुरुषं दिव्यं मांवक्ष्यमाणप्रकारं चिन्तयन् माम् एव याति आदिभरतमृगत्वप्राप्तिवत् ऐश्वर्यविशिष्टतया मत्समानकारो भवति ।अभ्यासो नित्यनैमित्तिकाविरुद्धेषु सर्वेषु कालेषु मनसा उपास्यसंशीलनम्, योगः तु अहरहःयोगकाले अनुष्ठीयमानं यथोक्तलक्षणम् उपासनम् । 8 । Thus, having laid down the common principle that the attainment of one's end is dependent on one's last thought, Sri Krshna proceeds to describe different modes of contemplation (Upasana) to be practised by the three groups of devotees for acquiring their objectives. Of these, he firstspeaks about the modes of contemplation to be adopted by the seekers of enjoyments and power and the type of the last thought consistent with their contemplation.Contemplating on Me, the Supreme Divine Person, in the way to be specified further, at the last moment, with a mind trained by constant practice and Yoga, and not moving towards anything else, one reaches Me alone, i.e., attains a form similar to that of Mine, by virtue of the attributes of enjoyment and the prosperity contemplated upon, like the royal sage Bharata who acquired the form of a deer on account of contemplating on it at the last moment. Abhyasa is the training of the mind to be often in touch with the object of meditation at all times without obstruction to the performance of the prescribed periodical andoccasional rituals. Yoga is the meditation practised day by day at the time of Yoga practice in the manner prescribed.  
258 कविं सर्वज्ञं पुराणं पुरातनम् अनुशासितारं विश्वस्य प्रशासितारम् अणोः अणीयांसं जीवाद् अपि सूक्ष्मतरं सर्वस्य धातारं सर्वस्य स्रष्टारम् अचिन्त्यरूपं सकलेतरविसजातीयस्वरपम् आदित्यवर्णं तमसः परस्तात् अप्राकृतस्वासाधारणदिव्यरूपम् तम् एवंभूतम् अहरहः अभ्यस्यमानभक्तियुक्तयोगबलेन आरूढसंस्कारतया अचलेन मनसा प्रयाणकाले भ्रुवोः मध्ये प्राणम् आवेश्य संस्थाप्य तत्र भ्रुवोर्मध्ये दिव्यं पुरुषं यः अनुस्मरेत् स तम् एव उपैति तद्भावं याति, तत्समानैश्वर्यो भवति इत्यर्थः । 9-10 । He who focusses his life-breath between the eyebrows at tne time of death with a mind rendered unswerving through its purification achieved by the strength of Yoga conjoined with Bhakti practised day after day; and he who contemplates on the 'Kavi' i.e., the Omniscient, the 'Primeval', i.e., who existed always, 'the Ruler,' i.e., who governs the universe, 'who is subtler than the subtle,' i.e., who is subtler than the individual self, 'who is the Dhata' of all, i.e., the creator of all, 'whose nature is inconceivable,' i.e., whose nature is other than everything else, 'who is sun-coloured and beyond darkness', i.e., who possesses a divine form peculiar to Himself - he who concentrates on Him, the Divine Person described above, between the eyebrows, attains Him alone. He attains His state and comes to have power and glory similar to His. Such is the meaning.  
259 अथ कैवल्यार्थिनां स्मरणप्रकारम् आह -यद् अक्षरम् अस्थूलत्वादिगुणकं वेदविदो वदन्ति वीतरागाः च यतयो यद् अक्षरं विशन्ति यद् अक्षरं प्राप्तुम् इच्छन्तो ब्रह्मचर्यं चरन्ति तत् ते पदं संग्रहेण प्रवक्ष्ये । पद्यते गम्यते अनेन इति पदं तद् निखिलवेदान्तवेद्यं मत्स्वरूपम् अक्षरं यथा उपास्यं तथा संक्षेपेण प्रवक्ष्यामि इत्यर्थः । 11 । Then He describes the mode of meditation to be adopted by the seeker of Kaivalya or the Jijnasu (i.e., of one who seeks to know his own self or Atman in contrast to one whose object is God-realisation).I shall show you briefly that goal which the knowers of the Veda call 'the imperishable,' i.e., as endowed with attributes like non-grossness etc., that imperishable which 'the ascetics freed from passion enter'; that imperishable 'desiring to attain which men practise continence'. What is attained by the mind as its goal is called 'pada'. I shall tell you briefly My essential nature which is beyond all description and which is explained in the whole of Vedanta and which is to be meditated upon. Such is the meaning.  
260 सर्वाणि श्रोत्रादीनि इन्द्रियाणि ज्ञानद्वारभूतानि संयम्य स्वव्यापारेभ्यो विनिवर्त्य हृदयकमलनिविष्टे मयि अक्षरे मनो निरुध्य योगाख्यां धारणाम् आस्थितः मयि एव निश्चलां स्थितिम् आस्थितः ।ओम् इति एकाक्षरं ब्रह्म मद्वाचकं व्याहरन् वाच्यं माम् अनुस्मरन् आत्मनः प्राणं मूर्ध्न्याधाय देहं त्यजन् यः प्रयाति स याति परमां गतिं प्रकृतिवियुक्तं मत्समानाकारं अपुनरावृत्तिम् आत्मानं प्राप्नोति इत्यर्थः । 'यः स सर्वेषु भूतेषु नश्यत्सु न विनश्यति ।। अव्यक्तोऽक्षर इत्युक्तस्तमाहुः परमां गतिम् ।' (8।20,21) इति अनन्तरम् एव वक्ष्यते । 12-13 । Subduing all the senses like ear etc., which constitute the 'doorways' for sense impressions, i.e., withdrawing them from their natural functions; holding the mind in Me, the imperishable 'seated within the lotus of the heart'; practising 'steady abstraction of mind (Dharana) which is calledconcentration or Yoga,' i.e., abiding in Me alone in a steady manner; uttering the sacred 'syllable Om,' the brahman which connotes Me; remembering Me, who am expressed by the syllable Om; and fixing his 'life-breath within the head' - whosoever abandons the body and departs in this way reaches the highest state. He reaches the pure self freed from Prakrti, which is akin to My form. From that state there is no return. Such is the meaning. Later on Sri Krshna will elucidate: 'They describe that as the highest goal of the Atman, which is not destroyed when all things are destroyed, which is unmanifest and imperishable' (8.20-21).  
261 एवम् ऐश्वर्यार्थिनः कैवल्यार्थिनश्च स्वप्राप्यानुगुणः भगवदुपासनप्रकार उक्तः । अथ ज्ञानिनो भगवदुपासनप्रकारं प्राप्तिप्रकारं च आह -नित्यशो माम् उद्योगप्रभृति सततं सर्वकालम् अनन्यचेताः यः स्मरति अत्यर्थं मत्प्रियत्वेन मत्स्मृत्या विना आत्मधारणम् अलभमानो निरतिशयप्रियां स्मृतिं यः करोति तस्य नित्ययुक्तस्य नित्ययोगं का़ङ्क्षमाणस्य योगिनः अहं सुलभः अहम् एव प्राप्यः, न मद्भाव ऐश्वर्यादिकः ।सुप्रापश्च तद्वियोगम् असहमानः अहम् एव तं वृणे; मत्प्राप्त्यनुगुणोपासनविपाकं तद्विरोधि-निरसनम् अत्यर्थं मत्प्रियत्वादिकं च अहम् एव ददामि इत्यर्थः । 'यमेवैष वृणुते तेन लभ्यः' (मु0 3।2।3) इति हि श्रूयते । वक्ष्यते च 'तेषां सततयुक्तानां भजतां प्रीतिपूर्वकम् । ददामि बुद्धियोगं तं येन मामुपयान्ति ते ।। तेषामेवानुकम्पार्थमहमज्ञानजं तमः । नाशयाम्यात्मभावस्थो ज्ञानदीपेन भास्वता ।।' (10।10-11) इति । 14 । Thus, the modes of contemplation on the Lord by the aspirants after prosperity and Kaivalya (Atman-consciousness) have been taught according to the goal they lead to. Now, Sri Krshna teaches the way of meditation on the Lord by the Jnanin and the mode of attainment by him.I am easy of access to that Yogin who is 'ever integrated with Me,' i.e., who wants constant contact with Me, who recollects Me; and whose mind is not in 'anything else without break' (Nityasah), i.e., at the time of meditation and also during all other times (Satatam). As I am exceedingly dear to him, he is unable to sustain himself without remembering Me and cherishing My memory which is incomparably dear to him. I am the only object he wants to attain and not any mode of My being like sovereignty, etc. I Myself grant him the capacity to attain full maturity in devotional practice necessary for attaining Me -namely, the annulment of all obstacles and the establishment of the state of mind that renders Me exceedingly dear to oneself. The Sruti alsosays: 'He whom this (Self) chooses, by him He can be obtained' (Mun.U.3.2.3 and Ka.U.2.22). And SriKrshna Himself will teach:"To those, ceaselessly united, who worship Me, I bestow that discernment by which they come to Me. Out of mercy for them, I, abiding in their heart, dispel the darkness born of ignorance, by the brilliant lamp of knowledge" (10.10; 11).  
262 अतः परम् अध्यायशेषेण ज्ञानिनः कैवल्यार्थिनश्च अपुनरावृत्तिम् ऐश्वर्यार्थिनः पुनरावृत्तिं च आह -मां प्राप्य पुनः निखिलदुःखालयम् अस्थिरं जन्म न प्राप्नुवन्ति यत एते महात्मानः महामनसोयथावस्थितमत्स्वरूपज्ञानाः अत्यर्थमत्प्रियत्वेन मया विना आत्मधारणम् अलभमाना मयि आसक्तमनसो मदाश्रयाः माम् उपास्य परमसंसिद्विरूपं मां प्राप्ताः । 15 । In the remaining part of this chapter, He teaches that the Jnanis and the aspirants after Kaivalya do not return and that the seekers after power and prosperity return.Having attained Me, they are not subject to rebirth, which leads to a condition that is transient and an abode of sorrow. These great souls, i.e.,men of noble minds; worship and attain Me as the supreme object of attainment; because they possess knowledge of My essential nature as it really is; they are unable to maintain or sustain themselves without Me, as I am exceedingly dear to them. With their minds deeply attached to Me and completely dependent on Me, they reach Me as the supreme goal.  
263 ऐश्वर्यगतिं प्राप्तानां भगवन्तं प्राप्तानां च पुनरावृत्तौ अपुनरावृतौ च हेतुम् अनन्तरम् आह -ब्रह्मलोकपर्यन्ताः ब्रह्माण्डोदरवर्तिनः सर्वे लोकाः भोगैश्वर्यालयाः पुनरावर्तिनः विनाशिनः । अत ऐश्वर्यगतिं प्राप्तानां प्राप्यस्थानविनाशाद् विनाशित्वम् अवर्जनीयम् । मां सर्वज्ञं सत्यसंकल्पं निखिलजगदुत्पत्तिस्थितिलयलीलं परमकारुणिकं सदा एकरूपं प्राप्तानां विनाशप्रसङ्गाभावात् तेषां पुनर्जन्म न विद्यते । 16 । Sri Krshna next teaches the reason for the return to Samsara of those aspirants for Aisvarya (prosperity) and for the non-return to Samsara of those who have reached the Lord:All the worlds, from the realm of Brahma included in the Brahmanda (cosmic sphere), are spheres in which experiences conferring Aisvarya (prosperity and power) can be obtained. But they are destructible and those who attain them are, subject to return. Therefore destruction, i.e.,return is unavoidable for the aspirants for Aisvarya, as the regions where it is attained perish. On the contrary there is no rebirth to those who attain Me, the Omniscient, who has true resolves, whose sport is creation, sustentation and dissolution of the entire universe, who is supremely compassionate and who is always of the same form. For these reasons there is no destruction in the case of those who attain Me.  
264 ब्रह्मलोकपर्यन्तानां लोकानां तदन्तर्वर्तिनां च परमपुरुषसंकल्पकृताम् उत्पत्तिविनाशकालव्यवस्थाम् आह-ये मनुष्यादिचतुर्मुखान्तानां मत्संकल्पकृताहोरात्रव्यवस्थाविदो जनाः, ते ब्रह्मणः चतुर्मुखस्य यत् अहः चतुर्युगसहस्रावसानं विदुः, रात्रिं च तथारूपाम् । 17 । He now elucidates the time-period settled by the Supreme Person's will in regard to the evolution and dissolution of the worlds upto the cosmic sphere of Brahma and of those who are within them.These men who know the order of the day and night as established by My will in regard to all beings, beginning with man and ending with Brahma - they understand that what forms Brahma's day is a unit comprising in it a thousand periods of four Yugas (Catur-yugas) and a night is a unit of equal duration.  
265 तत्र ब्रह्मणः अहरागमसमये त्रैलोक्यान्तर्वर्तिन्यो देहेन्द्रियभोग्यभोगस्थानरूपा व्यक्तयः चतुर्मुखदेहावस्थाद्अव्यक्तात् प्रभवन्ति । तत्र एव अव्यक्तावस्थाविशेषे चतुर्मुखदेहे रात्र्यागमसमये प्रलीयन्ते । 18 । Thus, at the dawn of a day of Brahma, the manifest entities existing in the three worlds, possessing body, senses, objects, and places of enjoyment appear from the non-manifest (Avyakta), which is the condition of Brahma's body in that state, and at the beginning of the night they are dissolved into the condition of the unevolved (Avyakta) which forms the body of Brahma then.  
266 स एव अयं कर्मवश्यो भूतग्रामः अहरागमे भूत्वा भूत्वा रात्र्यागमे प्रलीयते पुनः अपि अहरागमे प्रभवति । तथा वर्षशतावसानरूपयुगसहस्रान्ते ब्रह्मलोकपर्य्यन्ता लोकाः ब्रह्मा च, पृथिवी अप्सुप्रलीयते, आपः तेजसि लीयन्ते इत्यादिक्रमेण अव्यक्ताक्षरतमःपर्यन्तं मयि एव प्रलीयन्ते ।एवं मद्व्यतिरिक्तस्य कृत्स्नस्य कालव्यवस्थया मत्त उत्पत्तेः मयि प्रलयात् च उत्पत्तिविनाश-योगित्वम् अवर्जनीयम् इति ऐश्वर्यगतिं प्राप्तानां पुनरावृत्तिः अपरिहार्या । माम् उपेतानां तु न पुनरावृत्तिप्रसङ्गः । 19 । The same multitude of beings, controlled by Karma, evolves again and again, undergoing dissolution at the coming of night. Again at the coming of the day it comes forth. Similarly, at the end of the life span of Brahma which consists of a hundred years of three hundred and sixty days each, each Brahma-day being a thousand Caturyugas, all the worldsincluding that of Brahma and Brahma himself dissolve into Me in accordance with the order thus described in the Srutis: 'The earth is dissolved into the waters, the waters are dissolved into light' etc., (Su.U.2). The process of involution ends, after passing through all theother stages of dissolution, with the Avyakta, Akasa and Tamas. Therefore, for every other entity except Myself, origination and annihilation are unavoidable. So for those who seek Aisvarya (prosperity and power) birth and dissolution according to the above mentioned time arrangement are unavoidable. But in the case of those who attain to Me,there is no return again to Samsara. [The immense duration of time, according to ancient thinkers, is as follows: Catur-yuga, or a unit of the four yugas of Krta, Treta, Dvapara and Kali, has a cumulative duration of 4,320,000 human years. A thousand such periods constitute a daytimeof Brahma and a similar period his night. Periodic creation and dissolution of the universe take place in these two periods respectively. One year of Brahma consists of 360 such diurnal period. A Brahma has a life-span of 100 such years - i.e., 311,040,000,000,000 human years. At the end of it, there is a Mahapralaya, and a new Brahma comes intobeing. Time thus goes on endlessly].  
267 अथ कैवल्यप्राप्तानाम् अपि पुनरावृत्तिः न विद्यते इति आह-तस्माद् अव्यक्ताद् अचेतनप्रकृतिरूपात् पुरुषार्थतया पर उत्कृष्टो भावः अन्यो ज्ञानैकाकारतया तस्माद् विसजातीयः अव्यक्तः केनचित् प्रमाणेन न व्यज्यत इति अव्यक्तः, स्वसंवेद्य-साधारणाकार इत्यर्थः । सनातनः उत्पत्तिविनाशानर्हतया नित्यः । यः सर्वेषु वियदादिषु भूतेषु सकारणेषु सकार्येषु विनश्यत्सु तत्र तत्र स्थितः अपि न विनश्यति । 20 । Now Sri Krshna teaches that there is no return to Samsara even for thosewho have attained Kaivalya (isolation of the self).Superior, as an object of human end, to this unmanifest(Avyakta), whichis inanimate Prakrti, there is another state of being, of a kind different from this, but also called Avyakta. It has only knowledge-form and is also unmanifest. It is the self, Atman. It is unmanifest because It cannot be apprehended by any means of knowledge (Pramanas). The meaning is that Its nature is unique and that It can be known only to Itself. That is,It can be understood only vaguely, in the ordinary ways of knowing. It iseternal, namely, ever-enduring, because It is not subject to origination and annihilaition. In texts like 'For those who meditate on the imperishable, undefinable, the unmanifest' (12.3) and 'The imperishable is called the unchanging' (15.16) that being the self. It has been called the unmanifest (Avyakta) and imperishable (Akshara); when all material elements like ether, etc., with their causes and effects are annihilated, the self is not annihilated in spite of It being found along with all the elements. [The elements are what constitute the bodies of beings].The knowers of the Vedas declare It as the highest end. The meaning is that the imperishable entity which has been denoted by the term 'highest goal' in the passage, 'Whosoever abandons the body and departs (in the manner described) reaches the highest state (Dhama)' (8.13), is the self (Atman) abiding in Its essential nature free from the contact with the Prakrti. This self, which abides thus in Its essential nature, by attaining which It does not return, this is My 'highest abode,' i.e., is the highestobject of My control. The inanimate Prakrti is one object of My control. The animate Prakrti associated with this inanimate Prakrti is the second object of My control. The pristine nature of the freed self, free from contact with inanimate matter, is the highest object of My rule. Such is the meaning. This state is also one of non-return to Samsara. Or the term'dhama' may signify 'luminosity'. And luminosity connotes knowledge. The essential nature of the freed self is boundless knowledge, or supreme light, which stands in contrast to the shrunken knowledge of theself, when involved in Prakrti. [The description given above is that of Kaivalya, the state of self-luminous existence as the pure self].  
268 सः अव्यक्तः अक्षर इति उक्तः 'ये त्वक्षरमनिर्देश्यमव्यक्तं पर्युपासते ।' (12।3) 'कूटस्थोऽक्षर उच्यते ।।' (15।16) इत्यादिषु तं वेदविदः परमां गतिम् आहुः अयम् एव 'यः प्रयाति त्यजन् देहं स याति परमां गतिम् ।।' इत्यत्र परमगतिशब्दनिर्दिष्टः अक्षरः प्रकृतिसंसर्गवियुक्तस्वरूपेण अवस्थित आत्मा इत्यर्थः ।यम् एवंभूतं स्वरूपेणावस्थितम् प्राप्य न निवर्तन्ते तद् मम परमं धाम परमं नियमनस्थानम् ।अचेतनप्रकृतिः एकं नियमनस्थानम्, तत्संसृष्टरूपा जीवप्रकृतिः द्वितीयं नियमनस्थानम्अचित्संसर्गवियुक्तं स्वरूपेणावस्थितं मुक्तस्वरूपं परमं नियमनस्थानम् इत्यर्थः । तत् च अपुनरावृत्तिरूपम् ।अथवा प्रकाशवाची धामशब्दः, प्रकाशः च इह ज्ञानम् अभिप्रेतं प्रकृतिसंसृष्टात् परिच्छिन्न-ज्ञानरूपाद् आत्मनः अपरिच्छिन्नज्ञानरूपतया मुक्तस्वरूपं परं धाम । 21 । Now Sri Krshna teaches that there is no return to Samsara even for thosewho have attained Kaivalya (isolation of the self).Superior, as an object of human end, to this unmanifest(Avyakta), whichis inanimate Prakrti, there is another state of being, of a kind different from this, but also called Avyakta. It has only knowledge-form and is also unmanifest. It is the self, Atman. It is unmanifest because It cannot be apprehended by any means of knowledge (Pramanas). The meaning is that Its nature is unique and that It can be known only to Itself. That is,It can be understood only vaguely, in the ordinary ways of knowing. It iseternal, namely, ever-enduring, because It is not subject to origination and annihilaition. In texts like 'For those who meditate on the imperishable, undefinable, the unmanifest' (12.3) and 'The imperishable is called the unchanging' (15.16) that being the self. It has been called the unmanifest (Avyakta) and imperishable (Akshara); when all material elements like ether, etc., with their causes and effects are annihilated, the self is not annihilated in spite of It being found along with all the elements. [The elements are what constitute the bodies of beings].The knowers of the Vedas declare It as the highest end. The meaning is that the imperishable entity which has been denoted by the term 'highest goal' in the passage, 'Whosoever abandons the body and departs (in the manner described) reaches the highest state (Dhama)' (8.13), is the self (Atman) abiding in Its essential nature free from the contact with the Prakrti. This self, which abides thus in Its essential nature, by attaining which It does not return, this is My 'highest abode,' i.e., is the highestobject of My control. The inanimate Prakrti is one object of My control. The animate Prakrti associated with this inanimate Prakrti is the second object of My control. The pristine nature of the freed self, free from contact with inanimate matter, is the highest object of My rule. Such is the meaning. This state is also one of non-return to Samsara. Or the term'dhama' may signify 'luminosity'. And luminosity connotes knowledge. The essential nature of the freed self is boundless knowledge, or supreme light, which stands in contrast to the shrunken knowledge of theself, when involved in Prakrti. [The description given above is that of Kaivalya, the state of self-luminous existence as the pure self].  
269 ज्ञानिनः प्राप्यं तु तस्माद् अत्यन्तविभक्तम् इत्याह -'मत्तः परतरं  नान्यत् किञ्चिदस्ति धनञ्जय ।  मयि सर्वमिदं प्रोतं सूत्रे मणिगणा इव ।।' (7।7)'मामेभ्यः परमव्ययम्' (7।13) इत्यादिना निर्दिष्टस्य यस्यान्तःस्थानि सर्वाणि भूतानि, येन च परेण पुरुषेण सर्वम् इदं ततं स परपुरुषो 'अनन्यचेताः सततम्' (8।14) इति अनन्यया भक्त्या लभ्यः । 22 ।अथ आत्मयाथात्म्यविदः परमपुरुषनिष्ठस्य च साधारणीम् अर्चिरादिकां गतिम् आह - द्वयोः अपिअर्चिरादिका गतिः श्रुतौ श्रुता, सा च अपुनरावृत्तिलक्षणा ।यथा पञ्चाग्निविद्यायां 'तद्य इत्थं विदुः ये चेमेऽरण्ये श्रद्धां तप इत्युपासते तेऽर्चिषमभिसंभवन्त्यर्चिषोऽहः' (छा0 उ0 5।10।1) इत्यादौ अर्चिरादिकया गत्या गतस्य परब्रह्मप्राप्तिः अपुनरावृत्तिः च उक्ता 'स एनान्ब्रह्म गमयति' 'एतेन प्रतिपद्यमाना इमं मानवमावर्त्तं नावर्तन्ते' (छा0 उ0 4।15।5) इति ।न च प्रजापतिवाक्यादौ श्रुतपरविद्याङ्गभूतात्मप्राप्तिविषया इयम् 'तद्य इत्थं विदुः' इति गतिश्रुतिः'ये चेमेऽरण्ये श्रद्धां तप इत्युपासते' (छा0 उ0 5।10।1) इति परविद्यायाः पृथक्श्रुतिवैयर्थ्यात् ।पञ्चाग्निविद्यायां च 'इति तु पञ्चम्यामाहुतावापः पुरुषवचसो भवन्ति' (छा0 उ0 5।9।1) इति'रमणीयचरणाः कपूयचरणाः' (छा0 उ0 5।10।7) इति पुण्यपापहेतुको मनुष्यादिभावो अपाम्एव भूतान्तरसंसृष्टानाम् आत्मनस्तु यत्परिष्वङ्गमात्रम् इति चिदचितोर्विवेकम् अभिधाय'तद्य इत्थं विदुः तेऽर्चिषमभिसंभवन्ति' (छा0 उ0 5।10।1) 'इमं मानवमावर्त्तं नावर्तन्ते' (छा0 उ0 4।15।5) इति विविक्ते चिदचिद्वस्तुनि त्याज्यतया प्राप्यतया च 'तद्य इत्थं विदुस्तेऽर्चिरादिना गच्छन्ति न च पुनरावर्तन्ते' इति उक्तम् इति गम्यते ।आत्मयाथात्म्यविदः परमपुरुषनिष्ठस्य च 'स एनान्ब्रह्म गमयति' (छा0 उ0 4।15।5) इति ब्रह्मप्राप्तिवचनात् अचिद्वियुक्तम् आत्मवस्तु ब्रह्मात्मकतया ब्रह्मशेषतैकरसम् इत्यनुसंधेयम् ।तत्क्रतुन्यायाच्च परशेषतैकरसत्वं च 'य आत्मनि तिष्ठन्यस्यात्मा शरीरम्' (श0 ब्रा0 14।6।5।5।30) इत्यादिश्रुतिसिद्धम् । Sri Krshna now teaches that the object of attainment for the Jnanin, is totally different from this:That Supreme Person has been declared in such texts as 'There is nothinghigher than Myself, O Arjuna. All this is strung on Me, as rows of gemsare on a thread' (7.7), and 'Who am beyond them and immutable' (7.13).He is the Supreme Person in whom all beings abide and by whom all this is pervaded. He is to be attained by undivided devotion as described in 'Whose mind is not in anything else' (8.14).Now, Sri Krshna teaches the 'path of light,' described in the Srutis whichis common to the knowers of the true nature of the self and to the persons who are devoted to the Supreme Person. The nature of this path is qualified as one of 'non-return to Samsara'. In the case of a person journeying through the 'path of light', as described in the text of the worship of Five Fires is as follows: 'So those who know It (i.e., the eternal nature of the individual self thus, as taught in the Vidya of the Five Fires, and those too who worship in the forest with faith and Tapas go to the deity ruling over the rays of light, and from there to the deity of the day' (Cha.u.5.10.1). The attainment of the Supreme Brahman and the non-return to birth are declared with reference to those who go by the path of light, etc., by the teaching that 'He the Supreme Being leads them to Brahman. Those who reach by this path do not return to the (worldly) life of man' (Cha.U., 4.15.5). This declaration of the goal in the text, 'Those who know it thus etc.,' is not with reference to the attainment of the Atman which constitutes ony the limb of the science of Brahman as taught in the beginning of Prajapati's teaching. For therewill then arise purposelessness for the separate teaching of the same in regard to the principal science of the Supreme in the text. 'Those who are in the forest worship by means of faith and austerity etc.,' (Cha.U.5.10.1). It is taught in the Vidya (meditation) of Five Fires: 'Thus, indeed, in the fifth oblation the waters become Purusha' (Cha.u.5.9.1) and 'Those with a balance of good Karmas... and those with a balance of bad Karmas' (Ibid. ,5.10.7). What is to be understood here is that the state of existenceas men and other beings, which has its origin in good and evil Karmas, refers to the 'waters' which alone are mixed with other elements (i.e., to the body-mind); as for the self, there is only contact with them and not identificaiton. Thus, is declared the difference between intelligent self and inanimate matter. Then, by the texts, 'Those who know this' (Ibid., 5.10.1), 'Those who go to the rays oflight' (Ibid.), and 'They who proceed by it return not to the human condition here,' it is instructed that those who know this concerning the sentient and inanimate entities - the one to be attained and the other to be rejected, they journey along the path described by the terms 'beginning with light and do not return to Samsara'. On account of the passage, 'He leads them to the Brahman' (Ibid., 4.15.5), which holds that the Brahman is attained by both the knower of real nature of the self and the devotees of the Supreme Person and also because of the axiom of 'results; according to efforts' (Tat-kratu-nyaya), the entity self, separated from the inanimate matter, should be constantly meditated upon as having its sole joy in absolute subservience to the Supreme Brahman who is Its self. The self's nature of finding only joy consists in absolute subservience to the SupremePerson. This is proved from the Srutis like `He who dwells within the self whose body is the self' (Sa.Bra., 14.6.5.5.30).  
270 अत्र कालशब्दो मार्गस्य अहःप्रभृतिसंवत्सरान्तकालाभिमानिदेवताभूयस्तया मार्गोपलक्षणार्थः,यस्मिन् मार्गे प्रयाता योगिनो अनावृत्तिं पुण्यकर्माणः च आवृत्तिं यान्ति, तं मार्गं वक्ष्यामि इत्यर्थः । 23 । Here, the term 'time,' denotes a path, having many deities beginning with day and ending with year. The deities preside over divisions of time. The meaning is - I declare to you the path departing in which Yogins do not return and also the path departing in which the doers of good actions return. By the clause, 'Light in the form of fire, the day, bright fortnight, six months of the northern course,' year also is denoted.  
271 अग्निः ज्योतिरहः शुक्लः षण्मासा उत्तरायणम्, इति संवत्सरादीनां प्रदर्शनम् । 24 । Here, the term 'time,' denotes a path, having many deities beginning with day and ending with year. The deities preside over divisions of time. The meaning is - I declare to you the path departing in which Yogins do not return and also the path departing in which the doers of good actions return. By the clause, 'Light in the form of fire, the day, bright fortnight, six months of the northern course,' year also is denoted.  
272 एतत् च धूमादिमार्गस्थपितृलोकादेः प्रदर्शनम् । अत्र योगिशब्दः पुण्यकर्मसम्बन्धिविषयः । 25 । This denotes the world of the manes etc., described by the term 'starting with smoke.' Here the term Yogin connotes one associated with good actions.  
273 शुक्ला गतिः अर्चिरादिका कृष्णा च धूमादिका । शुक्लया अनावृत्तिं यान्ति कृष्णया तु पुनः आवर्तन्ते । एते शुक्लकृष्णे गती ज्ञानिनां पुण्यकर्मणां च श्रुतौ शाश्वते मते । 'तद्य इत्थं विदुर्ये चेमेऽरण्ये श्रद्धां तप इत्युपासते तेऽर्चिषमभिसंभवन्ति ।' (छा0 उ0 5।10।1) 'अथ य इमे ग्रामे इष्टापूर्ते दत्तमित्युपासते ते धूममभिसम्भवन्ति' (छा0 उ0 5।10।3) इति । 26 । The bright path is characterised by the terms 'starting with light'. The dark path is characterised by the 'terms starting with smoke'. By the bright path a man goes to the plane of no-return, but he who goes by the dark path returns again. In the Sruti both the bright and dark paths are said to be eternal in relation to Jnanis and doers of good actions of many kinds. This is corroborated in the text: 'Those who know this and those who worship with faith do Tapas in the forest etc., they go to the light' (Cha.U.5.10.1), and 'But those who in the village perform Vedic and secular acts of a meritorious nature and the giving of alms - they pass to the smoke' (ibid., 5.10.3).  
274 एतौ मार्गौ जानन् योगी प्रयाणकाले कश्चन न मुह्यति अपि तु स्वेन एव देवयानेन पथा याति ।तस्माद् अहरहः अर्चिरादिगतिचिन्तनाख्ययोगयुक्तो भव । 27 । Having known these two paths, no Yogin is deluded. On the contrary, he goes by the path of gods, his own path.Therefore, be integrated every day with Yoga called meditation on the path described by the terms starting with light.  
275 अथ अध्यायद्वयोदितशास्त्रार्थवेदनफलम् आह -ऋग्यजुः सामाथर्वरूपवेदाभ्यासयज्ञतपोदानप्रभृतिषु सर्वेषु पुण्येषु यत् फलं निर्दिष्टम् इदम्अध्यायद्वयोदितं भगवन्माहात्म्यं विदित्वा तत् सर्वम् अत्येति एतद्वेदनसुखातिरेकेण तत् सर्वंतृणवत् मन्यते । योगी च भूत्वा ज्ञानिनः प्राप्यम् परम् आद्यं स्थानम् उपैति । 28 । Next Sri Krshna speaks of the fruit of knowing the import of the Sastras, as taught in the two chapters 7 and 8. Whatever fruit is said to accrue for meritorious actions in the form of the regular study of the Vedas Rg, Yajus, Saman and Atharvan as also for the performance of sacrifices, austerities, gifts - all these does one transcend on knowing this, namely the greatness of the Lord as taught in the two chapters (7 and 8). By immense joy arising from the knowledge of this, he regards all these results as negligible as straw. By being a Yogin, viz., a Jnanin, he reaches the supreme, primal abode which is without beginning and is attainable by such a Jnanin.  
