452 चतुर्दशोऽध्यायःत्रयोदशे प्रकृतिपुरुषयोः अन्योन्यसंसृष्टयोः स्वरूपयाथात्म्यं विज्ञाय अमानित्वादिभिः भगवद्भक्त्या अनुगृहीतैः बन्धात् मुच्यते इति उक्तम्, तत्र बन्धहेतुः पूर्वपूर्वसत्त्वादिगुणमय-सुखादिसङ्गः इति च अभिहितम् 'कारणं गुणसङ्गोऽस्य सदसद्योनिजन्मसु ।।' (13।21) इति । अथ इदानीं गुणानां बन्धहेतुताप्रकारो गुणनिवर्तनप्रकारः च उच्यते - श्रीभगवानुवाचपरं पूर्वोक्ताद् अन्यत् प्रकृतिपुरुषान्तर्गतम् एव सत्त्वादिगुणविषयं ज्ञानं भूयः प्रवक्ष्यामि, तत् च ज्ञानं सर्वेषां प्रकृतिपुरुषविषयज्ञानानाम् उत्तमम्, यद् ज्ञानं ज्ञात्वा सर्वे मुनयः तन्मननशीलाः इतः संसारमण्डलात् परां सिद्धिं गताः परिशुद्धात्मस्वरूपप्राप्तिरूपां सिद्धिम् अवाप्ताः । 1 । DIVISION ACCORDING TO THE THREE GUNASIt was shown in the thirteenth chapter that by knowing the truth concerning the nature of Prakrti and the self, which are conjoined with one another, one is freed from a bondage by means of Jnana consisting of modesty etc., when favoured by devotion to the Lord. And it was also stated that the cause of bondage consists in attachment to pleasure etc., which arises from prior linkage with Gunas such as Sattva etc., on the authority of passages like 'Its attachment to the Gunas is the cause of birth in good and evil wombs' (13.21). Now, it is proposed to describe how the Gunas become the cause of bondage and how their hold can be removed:I shall declare again another kind of knowledge which is distinct from what was taught earlier concerning Gunas such as Sattva, falling within the sphere of Prakrti and Purusha. This knowledge going to be revealed is the best of all forms of knowledge concerning the Prakrti and the self.Having gained this knowledge, all sages, namely, those given to meditation, have attained perfection beyond this world, the sphere of Samsara, having attained the essential and pure form of the self.  
453 पुनः अपि तद् ज्ञानं फलेन विशिनष्टि -इदं वक्ष्यमाणं ज्ञानम् उपाश्रित्य मम साधर्म्यम् आगताः मत्साम्यं प्राप्ताः, सर्गे अपि न उपजायन्ते न सृजिकर्मतां भजन्ते, प्रलये न व्यथन्ति च, न च संहृतिकर्मतां भजन्ते । 2 । He further extols this knowledge, distinguishing it by its fruits:They, 'resorting to this knowledge' which will be expounded later, come to partake of My nature, and they attain My status. 'They are not born at the time of creation, 'they are not subjected to the process of creation, and they 'suffer not at the time of dissolution,' i.e. they are not subjected to the distress involved in dissolution of the universe.   
454 अथ प्राकृतानां गुणानां बन्धहेतुताप्रकारं वक्तुं सर्वस्य भूतजातस्य प्रकृतिपुरुषसंसर्गजत्वम् 'यावत्संजायते किञ्चित्' (13।26) इत्यनेन उक्तं भगवता स्वेन एव कृतम् इत्याह -मम मदीयं कृत्स्नस्य जगतो योनिभूतं महद् ब्रह्म यत् तस्मिन् गर्मं दधामि अहम् । 'भूमिरापोऽनलो वायुः खं मनो बुद्धिरेव च । अहंकार इतीयं मे भिन्ना प्रकृतिरष्टधा ।। अपरेयम्' (7।4 -5) इति निर्दिष्टा अचेतना प्रकृतिः महदहंकारादिविकाराणां कारणतया महद्ब्रह्म इति उच्यते । श्रुतौ अपि क्वचित् प्रकृतिः अपि ब्रह्म इति निर्दिश्यते । 'यः सर्वज्ञः सर्ववित्, यस्य ज्ञानमयं तपः । तस्मादेतद्ब्रह्म नामरूपमन्नं च जायते' (मु0 उ0 1।1।9) इति । 'इतस्त्वन्यां प्रकृतिं विद्धि मे पराम् । जीवभूताम्' (7।5) इति चेतनपुञ्जरूपा या प्रकृतिः निर्दिष्टा, सा इह सकलप्राणिबीजतया गर्भशब्देन उच्यते । तस्मिन् अचेतने योनिभूते महति ब्रह्मणि चेतनपुञ्जरूपं गर्भं दधामि, अचेतनप्रकृत्या भोक्तृवर्गपुञ्जभूतां चेतनप्रकृतिं संयोजयामि इत्यर्थः । ततः तस्मात् प्रकृतिद्वयसंयोगात् मत्संकल्पकृतात् सर्वभूतानां ब्रह्मादिस्तम्बपर्यन्तानां सम्भवो भवति । 3 । In order to show how the Gunas of Prakrti constitute the cause of bondage, Sri Krshna now declares that, the aggregation of beings, born from the conjunction of Purusha and Prakrti as stated already in the passages, 'Whatever being is born' (13.26), is brought about by the Lord Himself:In that great brahman forming my womb, I lay the germ. The non-conscient Prakrti is alluded to in the text  'Earth, water, fire, air, ether, Manas, Buddhi and Ahamkara - thus My Prakrti is eightfold' (7.4-5). This Prakrti is designated hereby the name 'the great brahman' by reason of its being the cause of modifications like the Mahat, the Ahankara etc. In the Srutis also, here and there, even the Prakrti is designated as brahman, as in: 'He who is all-knowing, all-wise, whose austerity consists of knowledge - from Him are produced this brahman as also food, i.e., the universe of name and form' (Mun.U.1.1.9). The higher Prakrti, which is the mass of conscient selves, alluded to in the passage, 'Know My higher Prakrti to be distinct from this; it is the life-principle' (7.5). It is here expressed by the term 'Garbha', the source or womb in which all living beings originate. I lay the germ, constitutingthe mass of conscious beings, in that great brahman, which is non-conscient and forms the womb. From that conjunction between the two Prakrtis, brought about by My will is brought forth the origin of allentities from Brahma down to tuft of grass.  
455 कार्यावस्थः अपि चिदचित्प्रकृतिसंसर्गो मया एव कृतः इत्याह -सर्वासु देवगन्धर्वयक्षराक्षसमनुष्यपशुमृगपक्षिसरीसृपादिषु योनिषु तत्तन्मूर्तयः याः संभवन्ति जायन्ते तासां ब्रह्म महद् योनिः कारणं मया संयोजितचेतनवर्गा महदादिविशेषान्तावस्था प्रकृतिः कारणम् इत्यर्थः । अहं बीजप्रदः पिता तत्र तत्र च तत्तत्कर्मानुगुण्येन चेतनवर्गस्य संयोजकः च अहम् इत्यर्थः । 4 । He continues to say: 'I Myself bring about the conjunction of the conscient and unconscient Prakrtis in the manifested state of effect'.In all wombs such as those of gods, Gandharvas, Yakshas, Rakshasas, men, animals, beasts, birds, serpents etc., whatever forms are generated, the brahman (Prakrti) is the 'great womb' or cause. Beginning from Mahat and ending with the five elements, Prakrti, with the mass of conscient selves imbedded by Me in it, is the cause. I am the sowingfather. The meaning is that I am the imbedder of the multiplex of conscient selves according to each one's Karma.  
456 एवं सर्गादौ प्राचीनकर्मवशाद् अचित्संसर्गेण देवादियोनिषु जातानां पुनः पुनः देवादिभावेन जन्महेतुम् आह -सत्त्वरजस्तमांसि त्रयो गुणाः प्रकृतेः स्वरूपानुबन्धिनः स्वभावविशेषाः प्रकाशादिकार्यैक-निरूपणीयाः, प्रकृत्यवस्थायाम् अनुद्भूताः तद्विकारेषु महदादिषु उद्भूताः, महदादिविशेषान्तैः आरब्धदेवमनुष्यादिदेहसंबन्धिनम् एनं देहिनम् अव्ययं स्वतो गुणसम्बन्धानर्हं देहे वर्तमानं निबध्नन्ति देहे वर्तमानत्वोपाधिना निबध्नन्ति इत्यर्थः । 5 । Now He teaches the cause of continuing births as divinities etc., of those born in this manner at the beginning of a cycle of creation. It is due to the conjunction of these beings with Prakrti, in keeping with their old Karmas:The three Gunas of Prakrti - Sattva, Rajas and,Tamas are inherent in the essential nature of Prakrti and are particular expressions of it. They can be known only through their effects such as 'brightness' etc. They are notapparent in the unevolved state of Prakrti but become, apparent in its transformations as Mahat etc. They bind the self which is conjoined withbodies such as those of divinities, men etc., composed of the modifications of Prakrti beginning with Mahat and ending with the elements. The self is immutable, i.e., It is not in Its pristine nature conjoined with the Gunas, But the Gunas bind It when residing in the body. The meaning is that they bind It by virtue of the limiting conditions of Its living in the body.  
457 सत्त्वरजस्तमसाम् आकारं बन्धनप्रकारं च आह -तत्र सत्त्वरजस्तमःसु सत्त्वस्य स्वरूपम् ईदृशं निर्मलत्वात् प्रकाशकम्, प्रकाशसुखावरण-स्वभावरहितता निर्मलत्वम्, प्रकाशसुखजननैकान्तस्वभावतया प्रकाशसुखहेतुभूतम् इत्यर्थः । प्रकाशो वस्तुयाथात्म्यावबोधः, अनामयम् आमयाख्यकार्यं न विद्यते, इति अनामयम् अरोगताहेतुः इत्यर्थः । एष सत्त्वाख्यगुणो देहिनम् एनं सुखसङ्गेन ज्ञानसङ्गेन च बध्नाति, पुरुषस्य सुखसङ्गं ज्ञानसङ्गं च जनयति इत्यर्थः । ज्ञानसुखयोः सङ्गे हि जाते तत्साधनेषु लौकिकवैदिकेषु प्रवर्तते, ततः च तत्फलानुभव-साधनभूतासु योनिषु जायते, इति सत्त्वं सुखज्ञानसङ्गद्वारेण पुरुषं बध्नाति, ज्ञानसुखजननं पुनः अपि तयोः सङ्गजननं च सत्त्वम् इति उक्तं भवति । 6 । Sri Krshna proceeds to speak of the nature of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas and their modes of binding (the self):Of 'these', i.e., of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, the characteristic nature of the Sattva is this: it illuminates on account of its being pure. What is called purity is to be bereft of qualities which veil light and happiness. Because its nature is solely the generation of light and happiness, it constitutes the cause of light and happiness. 'Light' or illumination isenlightenment about a thing as it is. It is 'not morbid', i.e., an effect called morbidity (disease) does not exist in its presence. The meaning is, that Sattva is the cause of health.The Guna, called Sattva, however, binds the self by attachment to happiness and knowledge. The meaning is that it causes attachment to happiness and knowledge.When attachment to knowledge and happiness is born, one engages oneself in secular and Vedic means for securingthem. Consequently, one is born in such bodies which constitute the means for realising such fruits. Hence the Sattva binds the self through attachment to happiness and knowledge.What is said is this: Sattva generates knowledge and happiness; again it generates attachment to them.  
458 रजो रागात्मकं रागहेतुभूतम्, रागो योषित्पुरुषयोः अन्योन्यस्पृहा । तृष्णासङ्गसमुद्भवं तृष्णासङ्गयोः उद्भवस्थानं तृष्णासङ्गहेतुहभूतम् इत्यर्थः । तृष्णा शब्दादिसर्वविषयस्पृहा । सङ्गः पुत्रमित्रादिषु संबन्धिषु संश्लेषस्पृहा । तथा देहिनं कर्मसु क्रियासु स्पृहाजननद्वारेण निबध्नाति, क्रियासु हि स्पृहया याः क्रिया आरभते देही, ताः च पुण्यपापरूपा इति तत्फलानुभव-साधनभूतासु योनिषु जन्महेतवो भवन्ति, अतः कर्मसङ्गद्वारेण रजो देहिनं निबधनाति । तद् एवं रजो रागतृष्णासङ्गहेतुः कर्मसङ्गहेतुः च इति उक्तं भवति । 7 । Rajas is of the nature of passion, namely, it causes sexual desire. 'Passion' (Raga) is mutual yearning between a man and a woman. 'Springing from thirst and attachment' means it is the source of sensualityand attachment. 'Trshna', (thirst, sensuality) is the longing for all sense-objects, such as sound etc. 'Sanga' (attachment) is the inordinate longing for union with one's sons, friends and such other relations. By creating longing for actions, it binds the embodied self. Whatever actionshave been begun by the self from longing for sensual enjoyments, they become the cause of births in bodies that constitute the means for experiencing such enjoyments. Therefore Rajas binds the embodied selfthrough attachment to actions. What is said is this: Rajas is the cause of sexuality, sensuality and attachment, and of constant engagement in actions.  
459 ज्ञानाद् अन्यद् इह अज्ञानम् अभिप्रेतम्, ज्ञानं वस्तुयाथात्म्यावबोधः, तस्माद् अन्यत् तद्विपर्यय-ज्ञानं तमः तु वस्तुयाथात्म्यविपरीतविषयज्ञानजं मोहनं सर्वदेहिनाम्, मोहो विपर्ययज्ञानम्,विपर्ययज्ञानहेतुः इत्यर्थः । तत् तमः प्रमादालस्यनिद्राहेतुतया तद्द्वारेण देहिनं निबध्नाति । प्रमादः कर्तव्यात् कर्मणः अन्यत्र प्रवृत्तिहेतुभूतम् अनवधानम् । आलस्यं कर्मसु अनारम्भस्वभावः, स्तब्धता इति यावत् । पुरुषस्य इन्द्रियप्रवर्तनश्रान्त्या सर्वेन्द्रियप्रवर्तनोपरतिः निद्रा, तत्र बाह्येन्द्रियप्रवर्तनोपरमः स्वप्नः, मनसः अपि उपरतिः सुषुप्तिः । 8 । By 'false knowledge' is here to be understood as what is other than knowledge. What is called knowledge is right perception of things. What is other than this is false knowledge. And Tamas springs from knowledge contrary to the true nature of things. It deludes all embodied selves. Delusion is erroneous knowledge. The meaning is that Tamas isthe cause of erroneous knowledge. Being the cause of negligence, indolence and sleep, it binds the embodied self through them. 'Negligence' is inattentiveness, which causes one to perform works other than what ought to be done. 'Indolence' is the tendency to avoid work; it may even develop into absolute inaction, 'Sleep' is the state in which the external organs stop working due to exhaustion and seek to recover from the same. In sleep when only the out-going action of the senses stop, it is called dream state. When even the mind (Manas) ceases to function, it is called dreamless sleep.  
460 सत्त्वादीनां बन्धद्वारभूतेषु प्रधानानि आह -सत्त्वं सुखसङ्गप्रधानम्, रजः कर्मसङ्गप्रधानम्, तमः तु वस्तुयाथात्म्यज्ञानम् आवृत्य विपरीतज्ञानहेतुतया कर्तव्यविपरीतप्रवृत्तिसङ्गप्रधानम् । 9 । He states the cardinal feature forming the ways of bondage through Sattva etc.Sattva mainly attaches one to pleasure. Rajas mainly attaches one to actions. But Tamas, veiling knowledge of true things and being the cause of false knowledge, mainly attaches one to actions which are contrary to those which ought to be done .  
461 देहाकारपरिणतायाः प्रकृतेः स्वरूपानुबन्धिनः सत्त्वादयो गुणाः । ते च स्वरूपानुसंबन्धित्वेन सर्वदा सर्वे वर्तन्ते इति परस्परविरुद्धं कार्यं कथं जनयन्ति इत्यत्राह -यद्यपि सत्त्वादयस्त्रयः प्रकृतिसंसृष्टात्मस्वरूपानुबन्धिनः, तथापि प्रचीनकर्मवशाद् देहाप्यायनभूताहारवैषम्यात् च सत्त्वादयः परस्परसमुद्भवाभिभवरूपेण वर्तन्ते । रजस्तमसी कदाचिद् अभिभूय सत्त्वम् उद्रिक्तं वर्तते । तथा तमःसत्त्वे अभिभूय रजः कदाचित्, कदाचित् च रजःसत्त्वे अभिभूय तमः । 10 । The Sattva and other qualities evolve from the nature of Prakrti, developed into the form of the body. Owing to this fact that they have evolved out of the nature of Prakrti, they always co-exist in bodies at all time. How, then, can they cause effects which are mutually contrary? He replies:Even though all the three Gunas of Sattva etc., are associated with the nature of the self conjoined with Prakrti in the form of body, yet owing to the dominance of previous Karmas and the differences in the food nourishing the body, Sattva etc., preponderate or are subdued by turn.Sometimes Sattva preponderates prevailing over Rajas andTamas; sometimes Rajas preponderates prevailing overTamas and Sattva, and sometimes Tamas preponderate sprevailing over Rajas and Sattva.  
462 तत् च कार्योपलब्ध्या एव अवगच्छेद् इत्याह -सर्वेषु चक्षुरादिषु ज्ञानद्वारेषु यदा वस्तुयाथात्म्यप्रकाशे ज्ञानम् उपजायते, तदा अस्मिन् देहे सत्त्वं प्रवृद्धम् इति विद्यात् । 11 । He teaches that this changing preponderance of the Gunas can be inferred from the knowledge of the effects produced by them.When the light of knowledge shines revealing the truth of things emerging through all the gateways of knowledge such as the eyes etc., in the body, one should know that Sattva is prevailing.  
463 लोभः स्वकीयद्रव्यस्य अत्यागशीलता । प्रवृत्तिः प्रयोजनम् अनुद्दिश्य अपि चलनस्वभावता । आरम्भः कर्मणां फलसाधनभूतानां कर्मणाम् आरम्भे उद्योगः । अशमः इन्द्रियानुपरतिः । स्पृहा विषयेच्छा । एतानि रजसि प्रवृद्धे जायन्ते । यदा लोभदयो वर्तन्ते, तदा रजः प्रवृद्धम् इति विद्यात् इत्यर्थः । 12 । 'Greed' is the tendency not to spend one's own property. 'Activity' is the disposition to be active devoid of any purpose. 'Undertaking of works' is engagement in works which yield fruits. 'Unrest' is absence of rest of sense-activities. 'Longing' is the desire for sense objects. These predominate when Rajas has increased. The meaning is that whenever greed etc., prevail, then one should know that Rajas has very much increased.  
464 अप्रकाशः ज्ञानानुदयः । अप्रवृत्तिः च स्तब्धता । प्रमादः अकार्यप्रवृत्तिफलम् अनवधानम् । मोहः विपरीतज्ञानम् । एतानि तमसि प्रवृद्धे जायन्ते, एतैः तमः प्रवृद्धम् इति विद्यात् । 13 । 'Non-illumination' is the absence of knowledge. 'Inactivity' is immovableness. 'Negligence' is inadvertence resulting in works that should not be done. 'Delusion' is wrong knowledge. These arise when Tamas waxes strong. By these, one should know that the Tamas has increased very much.  
465 यदा सत्त्वं प्रवृद्धं तदा सत्त्वे प्रवृद्धे देहभृत् प्रलयं मरणं याति चेद् उत्तमविदाम् उत्तमतत्त्वविदाम् आत्मयाथात्म्यविदां लोकान् समूहान् अमलान् मलरहितान् अज्ञानरहितान् प्रतिपद्यते प्राप्नोति । सत्त्वे प्रवृद्धे तु मृतः आत्मविदां कुलेषु जनित्वा आत्मयाथात्म्यज्ञानसाधनेषु पुण्यकर्मसु अधिकरोति इति उक्तं भवति । 14 । When the 'Sattva prevails' i.e., while the Sattva continues to be prevalent,if the embodied self meets with death, It reaches the pure worlds, i.e., regions conducive to the knowledge of the self. The purport is this: If Sattva preponderates in a person at the time of death, he will be reborn in the families of those who have the knowledge of the self, and thus be qualified to perform auspicious acts which are the means of attaining the true knowledge of the self.  
466 रजसि प्रवृद्धे मरणं प्राप्य फलार्थं कर्म कुर्वतां कुलेषु जायते, तत्र जनित्वा स्वर्गादिफलसाधन-कर्मसु अधिकरोति इत्यर्थः । तथा तमसि प्रवृद्धे मृतो मूढयोनिषु श्वसूकरादियोनिषु जायते, सकलपुरुषार्थारम्भानर्हो जायते इत्यर्थः । 15 । Meeting with death when Rajas is preponderant, one is reborn in the families of those who act for the sake of fruits for themselves. Being reborn in such families, he becomes qualified to perform auspicious acts which constitute the way for attaining heaven and the like. Similarly, one who dies when Tamas is preponderant is born in the wombs of beings lacking in intelligence, namely, in the wombs of dogs, pigs etc. The meaning is that he is reborn as one incapable of realising any human end.  
467 एवं सत्त्ववृद्धौ मरणम् उपगम्य आत्मविदां कुले जातेन अनुष्ठितस्य सुकृतस्य फलाभिसन्धि-रहितस्य मदाराधनरूपस्य कर्मणः फलं पुनः अपि ततः अधिकसत्त्वजनितं निर्मलं दुःखगन्धरहितं भवति, इति आहुः सत्त्वगुणपरिणामविदः । अन्त्यकालप्रवृद्धस्य रजसः तु फलं फलसाधनकर्मसङ्गिकुले जन्म, फलाभिसन्धिपूर्वक-कर्मारम्भतत्फलानुभवपुनर्जन्मरजोवृद्धिफलाभिसन्धिपूर्वककर्मारम्भपरम्परारूपं सांसारिकं दुःखप्रायम् एव इति आहुः तद्गुणयाथात्म्यविदः । अज्ञानं तमसः फलम्, एवम् अन्तकालप्रवृद्धस्य तमसः फलम् अज्ञानपरम्परारूपम् । 16 । Thus, the 'fruit of a good deed,' namely, disinterested work in the form of My worship, performed by one who dies when Sattva prevails - is birth in the family of those who know the self. There he acquires more Sattva than before and the self becomes more pure, namely, devoid of the slightest vestige of suffering. So say those who know about the development of Sattva. But the 'fruit of Rajas,' dominating at the time of death, is 'suffering in Samsara. 'It consists in successive births in families attached to actions for the sake of fruits. Rebirth of this type increases Rajas further, resulting in actions for gaining their fruits. So say those who know about the developments of this Guna. 'Ignorance'is the result of Tamas. The fruit of Tamas dominating at the time of death, is successive conditions of Ignorance.  
468 तद् अधिकसत्त्वादिजनितं निर्मलादिफलं किम् इति अत्र आह -एवं परम्परया जाताद् अधिकसत्त्वाद् आत्मयाथात्म्यापरोक्षरूपं ज्ञानं जायते । तथा प्रवृद्धाद् रजसः स्वर्गादिफललोभः जायते, तथा प्रवृद्धात् च तमसः प्रमादः अनवधाननिमित्तासत्कर्मणि प्रवृत्तिः, ततः च मोहो विपरीतज्ञानम्, ततः च अधिकतरं तमः, ततः च अज्ञानं ज्ञानाभावः । 17 । What are the results derived from Sattva etc.? To this He answers:From the increase of Sattva, knowledge i.e., 'true and direct knowledge' of the self arises. From Rajas develops likewise 'intense desire' for heaven etc. From Tamas similarly develops 'negligence' leading to evil deeds; and from this, delusion, i.e., erroneous knowledge; and from thatstill more Tamas; and thence ignorance, namely absence of knowledge.  
469 एवम् उक्तेन प्रकारेण सत्त्वस्था ऊर्ध्वं गच्छन्ति क्रमेण संसारबन्धात् मोक्षं गच्छन्ति । रजसः स्वर्गादिफललोभकरत्वाद् राजसाः फलसाधनभूतं कर्म अनुष्ठाय तत्फलम् अनुभूय पुनः अपि जनित्वा तदपेक्षितं कर्म अनुतिष्ठन्ति इति मध्ये तिष्ठन्ति, पुनरावृत्तिरूपतया दुःखप्रायम् एव तत् । तामसाः तु जघन्यगुणवृत्तिस्था उत्तरोत्तरनिकृष्टतमोगुणवृत्तिषु स्थिता अधो गच्छन्ति । अन्त्यजत्वम्, ततः तिर्यक्त्वम्, ततः कृमिकीटादिजन्म, ततः स्थावरत्वम्, ततः अपि गुल्मलतात्वम्, ततः च शिलाकाष्ठलोष्टतृणादित्वं गच्छन्ति इत्यर्थः । 18 । Thus, in the manner explained, those who 'rest in Sattva, rise upwards,' namely, they attain liberation from the bonds of Samsara gradually. Those who, 'abiding in Rajas' which produces greed for heaven etc., engage themselves in actions which constitute the means for obtaining such results. Experiencing those results, they are born again and engage in, and perform, the very same acts. So they remain in the 'middle'. This is mostly suffering, as it is characterised by rebirths. Those of Tamasic nature 'stoop down' into lower levels, as Tamas grows ever worse in them. They go 'downwards' i.e., to the lowest state among human beings, then to the condition of animals; then to that of worms, insects etc., then of immovable things, and even to the condition of shrubs and creepers, and ultimately to the condition of stones, wood, clod of earth, straw etc.  
470 आहारविशेषैः फलाभिसन्धिरहितसुकृतविशेषैः च परम्परया प्रवर्धितसत्त्वानां गुणात्ययद्वारेण ऊर्ध्वगमनप्रकारम् आह -एवं सात्त्विकाहारसेवया फलाभिसन्धिरहितभगवदाराधनरूपकर्मानुष्ठानैः च रजस्तमसी सर्वात्मना अभिभूय उत्कृष्टसत्त्वनिष्ठो यदा अयं द्रष्टा गुणेभ्यः अन्यं कर्तारं न अनुपश्यति, गुणा एव स्वानुगुणप्रवृत्तिषु कर्तारः इति पश्यति, गुणेभ्यः च परं वेत्ति, कर्तृभ्यो गुणेभ्यः च परम् अन्यम् आत्मानम् अकर्तारं वेत्ति, स मद्भावम् अधिगच्छति, मम यो भावः तम् अधिगच्छति । एतद् उक्तं भवति - आत्मनः स्वतः परिशुद्धस्वभावस्य पूर्वपूर्वकर्ममूलगुणसङ्गनिमित्तं विविधकर्मसु कर्तृत्वम्, आत्मा स्वतः तु अकर्ता अपरिच्छिन्नज्ञानैकाकारः इति एवम् आत्मानं यदा पश्यति, तदा मद्भावम् अधिगच्छति इति । 19 । Sri Krshna now teaches about the manner of those in whom the Sattva has gradually increased by adopting special holy food and performance of special disinterested deeds, and who thus rise upward by transcending the Gunas.The seer has in the first place to totally subdue his Rajas and Tamas and stay in pure Sattva. This is accomplished through nourishment by Sattvika food and the performance of disinterested actions for the propitiation of the Lord. He then perceives 'no agent of action other than the Gunas', i.e., sees that the Gunas are themselves the agents according to their nature. Further he perceives what is 'other than the Gunas,' i.e., perceives the Gunas which are agents and the self who is not an agent of action. Such a seer attains to 'My state,' i.e., gains likeness with Me in transcending the three Gunas etc. The purport is this: The self, pure innature by Itself, gains agency through various actions by contact with theGunas springing from past Karmas. When one perceives the self in this way, namely, that the self by Itself is no agent of actions and is of the nature of infinite knowledge, then It attains to My likeness.  
471 कर्तृभ्यो गुणेभ्यः अन्यम् अकर्तारम् आत्मानं पश्यन् भगवद्भावम् अधिगच्छति इति उक्तम्, स भगवद्भावः कीदृशः? इति अत्र आह -अयं देही देहसमुद्भवान् देहाकारपरिणतप्रकृतिसमुद्भवान् एतान् सत्त्वादीन् त्रीन् गुणान् अतीत्य तेभ्यः च अन्यम्, ज्ञानैकाकारम् आत्मानम् पश्यन् जन्ममृत्युजरादुःखैः विमुक्तः अमृतम् आत्मानम् अनुभवति एष मद्भाव इत्यर्थः । 20 । It is stated that one attains to the likeness of the Lord after perceiving the self as a non-agent and as other than the Gunas. What is meant by the state of likeness to the Lord? Sri Krshna now describes it:The embodied self - 'crossing beyond these three Gunas,' the Sattva and the rest, which 'arise in the body,' i.e., spring from Prakrti transformed into the form of the body - perceives the self as different from the Gunas and as of the form of knowledge only. Released thus from birth, death, old age and sorrow, It experiences the immortal self. This is what is meant by My likeness.  
472 अथ गुणातीतस्य स्वरूपसूचनाचारप्रकारं गुणात्ययहेतुं च पृच्छन् अर्जुन उवाच -सत्त्वादीन् त्रीन् गुणान् एतान् अतीतः कैः लिङ्गैः कैः लक्षणैः उपलक्षितो भवति किमाचारः केन आचारेण युक्तः असौ? अस्य स्वरूपावगतेः लिङ्गभूताचारः कीदृशः इत्यर्थः । कथं च एतान् केनोपायेन सत्त्वादीन् त्रीन् गुणान् अतिवर्तते? । 21 । Arjuna now wants to know about the characteristics of one who has transcended the Gunas and the means of such transcendence:By what signs, namely, distinguishing features, is a man who has crossed beyond these three Gunas, Sattva and the rest, characterised? What is his behaviour? With what kind of behaviour is he associated and how does it serve as a sign for knowing his state? Such is the meaning. How does he, i.e., by what means does he cross beyond the three Gunas, the Sattva and the rest?  
473 श्रीभगवानुवाचआत्मव्यतिरिक्तेषु वस्तुषु अनिष्टेषु संप्रवृत्तानि सत्त्वरजस्तमसां कार्याणि प्रकाशप्रवृत्तिमोहाख्यानियो न द्वेष्टि, तथा आत्मव्यतिरिक्तेषु इष्टेषु तानि एव निवृत्तानि न काङ्क्षति । 22 । He does not hate the effects of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas known as illumination, activity and delusion respectively, when they are prevailingin regard to undesired things other than the self; nor longs for them when they cease, i.e., when desired things other than the self become unavailable. Hating things not conducive to the realisations of the selfand longing for things conducive thereof, do not come under this law stated in the Verse.  
474 उदासीनवद् आसीनः गुणव्यतिरिक्तात्मावलोकनतृप्त्या अन्यत्र उदासीनवद् आसीनः गुणैः द्वेषाकाङ्रक्षाद्वारेण यो न विचाल्यते, गुणाः स्वेषु कार्येषु प्रकाशादिषु वर्तन्ते इति अनुसंधाय यः तूष्णीम् अवतिष्ठते, न इङ्गते न गुणकार्यानुगुणं चेष्टते । 23 । He who sits like one 'unconcerned', namely, whose satisfaction consists in the vision of the self as different from the Gunas and sits like one unconcerned about other things and is not therefore disturbed by the Gunas through hatred and longing and who remains quiet, reflecting: 'The Gunas function in their effects like illumination etc.' and so 'restsunshaken,' i.e., does not act in accordance with the effects of the Gunas.  
475 समदुःखसुखः दुःखसुखयोः समः चित्तः स्वस्थः स्वस्मिन् स्थितः स्वात्मैकप्रियत्वेन तद्व्यतिरिक्तपुत्रादिजन्ममरणादिसुखदुःखयोः समचित्त इत्यर्थः ।। तत एव समलोष्टाश्मकाञ्चनः, तत एव च तुल्यप्रियाप्रियः तुल्यप्रियाप्रियविषयः ।। धीरः प्रकृत्यात्मविवेककुशलः, तत एव तुल्यनिन्दात्मसंस्तुतिः आत्मनि मनुष्यत्वाद्यभिमानकृतगुणागुणनिमित्तस्तुतिनिन्दयोः स्वासंबन्धानुसंधानेन तुल्यचित्तः, तत्प्रयुक्तमानापमानयोः तत्प्रयुक्तमित्रारिपक्षयोः अपि स्वसंबन्धाभावाद् एव तुल्यचित्तः, तथा देहित्वप्रयुक्तसर्वारम्भपरित्यागी, य एवंभूतः स गुणातीत उच्यते । 24-25।  He who is 'alike in pleasure and pain,' namely, whose mind is equal in pleasure and pain; 'who dwells in his self,' namely, who dwells in his self because his love for the self keeps his mind in equanimity in pleasure and pain arising from the birth, death etc., of his sons and other relatives and friends, and who, because of this, 'looks upon a clod, astone and a piece of gold as of equal value,' who consequently remains the same towards things dear or hateful, i.e. who treats alike the worldly objects desired and undesired; who is 'intelligent,' namely, proficient in discrimination between the Prakrti and the self; who, therefore, regards blame and praise as alike, namely, who, treats with equality praise and blame looking upon good and evil qualities as born of identification with bodies such as those of men etc. and as such unconnected with his real self; who is the 'same in honour and dishonour' because these are feelings based on the misconception that the body is the self, and as a consequence of such discrimination between the body and the self, 'looks alike on friend and foe,' because he understands that there is no connection between them and himself; and who has thus abandoned all enterprises in which embodied beings are involved - he who is like this. is said to have risen above the Gunas.  
476 अथ एवं रूपगुणात्यये प्रधानहेतुम् आह -'नान्यं गुणेभ्यः कर्तारम्' (14।19) इत्यादिना उक्तेन प्रकृत्यात्मविवेकानुसंधानमात्रेण न गुणात्ययः संपत्स्यते, तस्य अनादिकालप्रवृत्तविपरीतवासनाबाध्यत्वसंभवात् ।। मां सत्यसंकल्पं परमकारुणिकम् आश्रितवात्सल्यजलधिम् अव्यभिचारेण ऐकान्त्यविशिष्टेन भक्तियोगेन च यः सेवते, स एतान् सत्त्वादीन् गुणान् दुरत्ययान् अतीत्य ब्रह्मभूयाय ब्रह्मत्वाय कल्पते ब्रह्मभावयोग्यो भवति, यथावस्थितम् आत्मानम् अमृतम् अव्ययं प्राप्नोति इत्यर्थः । 26 । Now Sri Krshna states the main method (technique) for transcending such Gunas:The state of transcendence of Gunas is not attained merely by reflecting, on the difference between the Prakrti and the self as declared in the text such as, 'When the seer beholds no agent of action other than the Gunas, then he transcends the Gunas, for it is liable then to be sublated bycontrary subtle impressions (Vasanas) which have continued from beginningless time. He who, with unswerving Bhakti Yoga, namely, one-pointed Bhakti Yoga, serves Me of true-resolve, supremely compassionate and the ocean of parental affection for supplicants - such a man crosses over the Gunas of Sattva etc., which are otherwise invincible. He becomes worthy for brahmabhuya, the state of brahman, i.e., he becomes qualified for the state of brahman. The meaning is that he attains the self as It really is, immortal and immutable.  
477 हि शब्दो हेतौ, यस्माद् अहम् अव्यभिचारिभक्तियोगेन सेवितः अमृतस्य अव्ययस्य च ब्रह्मणः प्रतिष्ठा, तथा शाश्वतस्य च धर्मस्य अतिशयितनित्यैश्वर्यस्य ऐकान्तिकस्य सुखस्य च 'वासुदेवः सर्वम्' (8।9) इत्यादिना निर्दिष्टस्य ज्ञानिनः प्राप्यस्य सुखस्य इत्यर्थः ।। यद्यपि शाश्वतधर्मशब्दः प्रापकवचनः, तथापि पूर्वोत्तरयोः प्राप्यरूपत्वेन तत्साहचर्याद् अयम् अपि प्राप्यलक्षकः । एतद् उक्तं भवति - पूर्वत्र 'दैवी ह्येषा गुणमयी मम माया दुरत्यया । मामेव ये प्रपद्यन्ते' (7।14) इत्यारभ्य गुणात्ययस्य तत्पूर्वकाक्षरैश्वर्यभगवत्प्राप्तीनां च भगवत्प्रपत्त्येकोपायतायाः प्रतिपादितत्वात् तदेकान्तभगवत्प्रपत्त्येकोपायो गुणात्ययः तत्पूर्वकब्रह्मभावः च इति ।। 27 ।। The term 'hi' (for) denotes cause. I, who am to be served by unswerving Bhakti Yoga, am 'the ground of the individual self, immortal and immutable, and also of eternal Dharma,' namely, surpassing eternal prosperity and also perfect felicity, i.e., of the felicity attained by the Jnanin stated in texts such as 'Realising that Vasudeva is all' (7.19). I, being of such nature, devotion to Me helps the Jiva to transcend the Gunas. Although the expression 'eternal Dharma' is indicative of the conduct to be observed, in the given context, it means the goal to be attained; for, what follows and what precedes it, denote the goal and notconduct. The purport is this: It has been stated that seeking refuge with the Lord is the only means for transcending the Gunas and the attainmentof self-realisation, prosperity and the Supreme Being in the earlier text beginning with, 'For this divine Maya of Mine consisting of the three Gunasis hard to break through, except for those who take refuge in Me alone...' (7.14). Thus, seeking surrender to the Lord with one pointed mind is the only means for transcending the Gunas and for the attainment of the state of brahman through that. [Here Prapatti, surrender to the Lord, is mentioned as a limb of unswerving Bhakti Yoga according to some interpreters. This is however a disputable point, as some maintain that Prapatti is in itself an independent path].  
