12.1   अर्जुन उवाच एवं सततयुक्ता ये भक्तास्त्वां पर्युपासते । ये चाप्यक्षरमव्यक्तं तेषां के योगवित्तमाः ।।    Those devotees, who, ever integrated, thus meditate on You, and those again, who meditate on the Imperishable and the Unmanifest- whichof these have greater knowledge of Yoga? 
 12.2   श्रीभगवानुवाच मय्यावेश्य मनो ये मां नित्ययुक्ता उपासते । श्रद्धया परयोपेतास्ते मे युक्ततमा मताः ।।    Those who, ever integrated with Me and possessed of supreme faith worship Me, focusing their minds on Me- these are considered by Methe highest among the Yogins. 
 12.3   ये त्वक्षरमनिर्देश्यमव्यक्तं पर्युपासते । सर्वत्रगमचिन्त्यं च कूटस्थमचलं ध्रुवम् ।।    But those who meditate on the Imperishable (i.e., the self)the indefinable, the unmanifest, omnipresent, unthinkable, common to allbeings, immovable and constant. 
 12.4   सन्नियम्येन्द्रियग्रामं सर्वत्र समबुद्धयः । ते प्राप्नुवन्ति मामेव सर्वभूतहिते रताः ।।    Having subdued all the senses, being even-minded engaged in the welfare of all beings- they too come to Me only . 
 12.5   क्लेशोऽधिकतरस्तेषामव्यक्तासक्तचेतसाम् । अव्यक्ता हि गतिर्दुःखं देहवद्भिरवाप्यते ।।    Greater is the difficulty of those whose minds are thus attached to the unmanifest. For the way of the unmanifest is hard to reach byembodied beings. 
 12.6   ये तु सर्वाणि कर्माणि मयि सन्न्यस्य मत्पराः । अनन्येनैव योगेन मां ध्यायन्त उपासते ।।    For those who dedicate all actions to Me, hold Me as their supreme goal, intent on Me, and worship Me meditating on Me with exclusivedevotion; 
 12.7   तेषामहं समुद्धर्ता मृत्युसंसारसागरात् । भवामि न चिरात् पार्थ मय्यावेशितचेतसाम् ।।    Of those whose minds are thus focused on Me, I become soon their savior from the ocean of mortal life. 
 12.8   मय्येव मन आधत्स्व मयि बुद्धिं निवेशय । निवसिष्यसि मय्येव अत ऊर्ध्वं न संशयः ।।    Focus on me alone; and let your Buddhi enter into Me. Then, you will live in Me alone; there is no doubt. 
 12.9   अथ चित्तं समाधातुं न शक्नोषि मयि स्थिरम् । अभ्यासयोगेन ततो मामिच्छाप्तुं धनञ्जय ।।    If now you are unable to focus you mind on Me, then seek to reach Me, O Arjuna, by the practice or repetition. 
 12.10   अभ्यासेऽप्यसमर्थोऽसि मत्कर्मपरमो भव । मदर्थमपि कर्माणि कुर्वन्सिद्धिमवाप्स्यसि ।।    If you are incapable of even this practice of repetition, then devote yourself to My deeds (service). For even by working for Mysake, you will attain perfection. 
 12.11   अथैतदप्यशक्तोऽसि कर्तुं मद्योगमाश्रितः । सर्वकर्मफलत्यागं ततः कुरु यतात्मवान् ।।    If you are unable to do even this, i.e., taking refuge in My Yoga, then, with your self controlled, renounce the fruits of everyaction. 
 12.12   श्रेयो हि ज्ञानमभ्यासाज्ज्ञानाद्ध्यानं विशिष्यते । ध्यानात्कर्मफलत्यागस्त्यागाच्छान्तिरनन्तरम् ।।    Far  better is knowledge of the self than the repeated practice (of remembrance of the Lord). Better is meditation than thisknowledge; Better is renunciation of fruits of action than meditation. From such renunciation, peace ensues. 
 12.13   अद्वेष्टा सर्वभूतानां मैत्रः करुण एव च । निर्ममो निरहङ्कारः समदुःखसुखः क्षमी ।।    He who never hates any being, who is friendly and compassionate, who is free from feelings of I and mine, who looks upon all pain andpleasure the same as and who is enduring; 
 12.14   सन्तुष्टः सततं योगी यतात्मा दृढनिश्चयः । मय्यर्पितमनोबुद्धिर्यो मद्भक्तः स मे प्रियः ।।    He who is content, who ever meditates and is self-restrained and who is firm in his convictions, who has his mind and reason dedicated toMe- he is dear to Me. 
 12.15   यस्मान्नोद्विजते लोको लोकान्नोद्विजते च यः । हर्षामर्षभयोद्वेगैर्मुक्तो यः स च मे प्रियः ।।    He from whom the world has no cause to be frightened, who is not frightened by the world, who is free from joy and impatience, fear andrepulsion- he is dear to me. 
 12.16   अनपेक्षः शुचिर्दक्ष उदासीनो गतव्यथः । सर्वारम्भपरित्यागी यो मद्भक्तः स मे प्रियः ।।    He who is free from desires, who is pure, expert, indifferent and free from agony, who has renounced every undertaking- he is dear to Me. 
 12.17   यो न हृष्यति न द्वेष्टि न शोचति न काङ्क्षति । शुभाशुभपरित्यागी भक्तिमान्यः स मे प्रियः ।।    He who rejoices not, nor hates, nor grieves, nor desires, who renounces good and evil, who is full of devotion to me- dear to meis such a devotee. 
 12.18   समः शत्रौ च मित्रे च तथा मानापमानयोः । शीतोष्णसुखदुःखेषु समः सङ्गविवर्जितः ।।    He who is same to foe and friend, honor and dishonor, who is alike to both cold and heat, pleasure and pain, and who is free from allattachments; 
 12.19   तुल्यनिन्दास्तुतिर्मौनी सन्तुष्टो येन केनचित् । अनिकेतः स्थिरमतिर्भक्तिमान्मे प्रियो नरः ।।    He who regards alike both blame and praise, who is silent and content with any lot, who has no home, who is firm of mind, and who isdevoted to Me- dear to Me is such a man. 
 12.20   ये तु धर्म्यामृतमिदं यथोक्तम् पर्युपासते । श्रद्दधाना मत्परमा भक्तास्तेऽतीव मे प्रियाः ।।    But those devotees who follow this nectar of virtuous duty as taught above, who are full of faith and who regard Me as the Supreme- theyare exceedingly dear to Me. 
 12.0   ओंतत्सदिति श्रीमद्भगवद्गीतासु उपनिषत्सु ब्रह्मविद्यायां योगशास्त्रे श्रीकृष्णार्जुनसंवादे भक्तियोगो नाम द्वादशोऽध्यायः