069 यदि कर्मणः बुद्धिः एव ज्यायसी इति ते मता किमर्थं तर्हि घोरे कर्मणि मां नियोजयसि? एतदुक्तं भवति - ज्ञाननिष्ठा एव आत्मावलोकनसाधनम्, कर्मनिष्ठा तु तस्याः निष्पादिका,आत्मावसोकनसाधनभूता च ज्ञाननिष्ठा सकलेन्द्रियमनसां शब्दादिविषयव्यापारोपरतिनिष्पाद्या इत्यभिहिता । इन्द्रियव्यापारोपरतिनिष्पाद्यम् आत्मावलोकनं चेद् सिषाधयिषितम्, सकलकर्म-निवृत्तिपूर्वकज्ञाननिष्ठायाम् एव अहं नियोजयितव्यः, किमर्थं घोरे कर्मणि सर्वेन्द्रियव्यापाररूपे आत्मावलोकनविरोधिनि कर्मणि मां नियोजयसि इति । 1 । The vision of the individual self, which is preparatory to Bhakti, by the aspirant, along with the means of attaining the same, is explained in the next four chapters.'If you consider that knowledge is superior to works, why do you engage me in this terrible deed?' What is said here is this: If the firm adherence to knowledge is the only means to the vision of the self, then how can one accept the idea that devotion to works (Karma) leads to it? It was said before that this firm devotion to knowledge, which forms the means for the vision of the self, could arise by the cessation of the activities of all the senses and the mind in relation to their respective objects such as sound. If the vision of the self is to be attained, which arises by the cessation of the activities of the senses, I should be guided to engagemyself  solely to acquire firm devotion to knowledge, which is preceded by the abandoning of all works. For what purpose, then, do you engage me in this terrible deed, which consists in the activities of all the senses, and is thus an obstacle for the vision of the self?  
070 अतो व्यामिश्रवाक्येन मां मोहयसि इव इति मे प्रतिभाति; तथा हि आत्मावलोकनसाधनभूतायाः सर्वेन्द्रियव्यापारोपरतिरूपाया ज्ञाननिष्ठायाः तद्विपर्ययरूपं कर्म साधनं तद् एव कुरु इति वाक्यं विरुद्धं व्यामिश्रम् एव; तस्माद् एकम् अमिश्ररूपं वाक्यं वद; येन वाक्येन अहम् अनुष्ठेयरूपं निश्चित्य आत्मनः श्रेयः प्राप्नुयाम् । 2 । Consequently, it appears to me as if 'you confuse me with statements that seem to contradict each other.'  For, firm devotion to knowledge which forms the means for the vision of the self and which is of the nature of stopping the operations of the senses on the one hand, and on the other exhortation to action which is of a nature opposite to it, i.e., knowledge, as a means to the same vision of that Atman - these statements are contradictory and confusing. Therefore tell me clearly the path following which I can take a determined course and win the Supreme Being.  
071 पुरा उक्तं न सम्यग् अवधृतं त्वया; पुरा अपि अस्मिन् लोके विचित्राधिकारिसंपूर्णे द्विविधा निष्ठा ज्ञानकर्मविषया यथाधिकारम् असंकीर्णा एव मया उक्ता । न हि सर्वो लौकिकः पुरुषः संजातमोक्षाभिलाषः तदानीम् एव ज्ञानयोगाधिकारे प्रभवति, अपि तु अनभिसंहितफलेनकेवलपरमपुरुषाराधनरूपेण अनुष्ठितेन कर्मणा विध्वस्तमनोमलः अव्याकुलेन्द्रियो ज्ञाननिष्ठायाम् अधिकरोति - 'यतः प्रवृत्तिर्भूतानां येन सर्वमिदं ततम् । स्वकर्मणा तमभ्यर्च्य सिद्धिं विन्दति मानवः ।। (गीता 18।46) इति परमपुरुषाराधनैकवेषता कर्मणां वक्ष्यते ।इहापि 'कर्मण्येवाधिकारस्ते' (गीता 2।47) इत्यादिना अनभिसंहितफलं कर्म अनुष्ठेयं विधाय तेन विषयव्याकुलतारूपमोहाद् उत्तीर्णबुद्धेः 'प्रजहाति यदा कामान्' (गीता 2।55) इत्यादिना ज्ञानयोग उदितः । अतः सांख्यानाम् एव ज्ञानयोगेन स्थितिः उक्ता, योगिनां तु कर्मयोगेन ।संख्या बुद्धिः, तद्युक्ताः सांख्याः - आत्मैकविषयया बुद्ध्या युक्ताः सांख्याः, अतदर्हाः कर्मयोगाधिकारिणो योगिनः । विषयव्याकुलबुद्धियुक्तानां कर्मयोगे अधिकारः, अव्याकुलबुद्धीनां तु ज्ञानयोगे अधिकार उक्तः, इति न किंचिद् इह विरुद्धम्, न अपि व्यामिश्रम् अभिहितम् । 3 । The Lord  said:You have not properly understood what I taught you before. In this world, full of people with varying degrees of qualifications, I have taught in the days of yore two ways, that of knowledge (Jnana Yoga) and that of works, according to the qualifications of aspirants. There is no contradiction in this. It is not possible for all people of the world inwhom the desire for release has arisen, to become capable immediately for the practice of Jnana Yoga. But he who performs the worship of the Supreme Person without desire for fruits and thereby gets completely rid of inner impurities and keeps his senses unagitated - he becomescompetent for the path of knowledge. That all activities are for performing the worship of the Supreme Person will be taught in the Gita verse, 'He from whom the activities of all beings arise and by whom all this is pervaded - by worshipping Him with his duty man reaches perfection' (18.46). Earlier also performance of activities without any attachment to the fruits is enjoined by the verse beginning with. 'You have the right to work alone...' (02.47). Next for those whose intellect has been redeemed by this kind of discipline, is enjoined Jnana Yoga by the words, 'When a man renounces all the desires...' (02,55).Consequently, firm devotion to Jnana Yoga is taught only to the Sankhyas, i.e., those persons who are competent to follow the discipline of the knowledge of the self, and Karma Yoga to Yogins, i.e., to those competent for the path of work. Sankhya means Buddhi and those who are endowed with the Buddhi (intellectual or mental disposition) having only the self for its object, are Sankhyans. Therefore those who are not fit for this are qualified for Karma Yoga. Those who are possessed of Buddhi which is agitated by objects of the senses, are the persons qualified for Karma Yoga, whereas those whose Buddhi is not thusagitated, are qualified for Jnana Yoga. Therefore nothing contradictory and confusing is taught.  
072 सर्वस्य लौकिकस्य पुरुषस्य मोक्षेच्छायां संजातायां सहसा एव ज्ञानयोगो दुष्कर इत्याह -न शास्त्रीयाणां कर्मणाम् अनारम्भाद् एव पुरुषः नैष्कर्म्यं ज्ञाननिष्ठाम् आप्नोति ज्ञाननिष्ठां आप्नोति; सर्वेन्द्रियव्यापाराख्यकर्मोपरतिपूर्विकां ज्ञाननिष्ठां न प्राप्नोति इत्यर्थः । न च आरब्धस्य शास्त्रीयस्य कर्मणः त्यागात्; यतः अनभिसंहितफलस्य परमपुरुषाराधनविषयस्यकर्मणः सिद्धिः आत्मनिष्ठा स्यात्, अतः तेन विना तां न प्राप्नोति; अनभिसंहितफलैः कर्मभिः अनाराधितगोविन्दैः अविनष्टानादिकालप्रवृत्तानन्तपापसंचयैः अव्याकुलेन्द्रियतापूर्विकाआत्मनिष्ठा दुःसंपाद्या । 4 । It is said in the next stanza that Jnana Yoga is difficult to practise all at once, even when the desire for release arises in any worldly person:Not by non-performance of the acts prescribed by the scriptures, does a person attain freedom from Karma, i.e., Jnana Yoga; nor by ceasing to perform such actions as are prescribed in the scriptures - and are already begun by him. For success is achieved by actions done without attachment to the fruits and by way of worshipping the Supreme Person. Hence devoid of it (Karma-nishtha), one does not achieve Jnana-nishtha. By those persons who have not worshipped Govinda by acts done without attachment to fruits and whose beginningless and endless accumulation of evil has not been annulled thereby, constant contemplation on the self is not possible. It can be done only if it is preceded by the attainment of a state in which the operation of the senseshave been freed from disturbance.  
073 एतद् एव उपपादयति -न हि अस्मिन् लोके वर्तमानः पुरुषः कश्चित् कदाचिद् अपि कर्म अकुर्वाणः तिष्ठति । 'न किंचित्करोमि' इति व्यवसितः अपि सर्वः पुरुषः, प्रकृतिसमुद्भवैः सत्त्वरजस्तमोभिः प्राक्तनकर्मानुगुणं प्रवृद्धैःवगुणैः स्वोचितं कर्म प्रति अवशः कार्यते प्रवर्त्यते । अत उक्तलक्षणेनकर्मयोगेन प्राचीनं पापसञ्चयं नाशयित्वा गुणांश्च सत्त्वादीन् वशे कृत्वा निर्मलान्तः करणेन संपाद्यो ज्ञानयोगः । 5 । This view is put forward by the Lord:In this world, no man can rest without doing work; for every person, even though he may have determined, 'I will not do anything,' is caused to act, i.e., is compelled to act according to the Gunas born of Prakrti. The Gunas are Sattva, Rajas and Tamas which increase in accordance with his old Karma. Consequently, Jnana Yoga can be attained only by means of a purified inner organ after annulling the old accumulation of sins by means of Karma Yoga of the aforesaid characteristics and bringing Sattva and other Gunas under control.  
074 अन्यथा ज्ञानयोगाय प्रवृत्तः अपि मिथ्याचारो भवति इति आह -अविनष्टपापतया अजितबाह्यान्तःकरण आत्मज्ञानाय प्रवृत्तो विषयप्रवणतया आत्मनि विमुखीकृतमनाः विषयान् एव स्मरन् य आस्ते; अन्यथा संकल्प्य अन्यथा चरति इति स मिथ्याचारः उच्यते भवति इत्यर्थः । 6 । Otherwise, one who engages oneself in Jnana Yoga becomes a hypocrite:He whose inner and outer organs of senses are not conquered because of his sins not being annulled but is none the less struggling for winning knowledge of the self, whose mind is forced to turn away from the self by reason of it being attached to sense objects, and who consequently lets his mind dwell on them - he is called a hypocrite, because his actions are at variance with his professions. The meaning is that by practising the knowledge of the self in this way, he becomes perverted and lost.  
075 अतः पूर्वाभ्यस्तविषयसजातीये शास्त्रीये कर्मणि इन्द्रियाणिआत्मावलोकनप्रवृत्तेन मनसा नियम्य तैः स्वत एव कर्मप्रवणैः इन्द्रियैः असङ्गपूर्वकं यः कर्मयोगम् आरभते, सः असंभाव्यमान-प्रमादत्वेन ज्ञाननिष्ठाद् अपि पुरुषाद् विशिष्यते । 7 । Consequently, he who, with aspiration to have the vision of the self, directs his senses to action according to the scriptures, such action being of the same class as those which he practised earlier, and who then begins to practise Karma Yoga, after renouncing attachment, with the senses which are naturally inclined to action - he, by reason of there being no chance of errors, excels a man following Jnana Yoga, because there is no fear of a fall in his case.  
076 नियतं व्याप्तम् प्रकृतिसंसृष्टेन हि व्याप्तं कर्म, प्रकृतिसंसृष्टत्वम् अनादिवासनया । नियतत्वेन सुशकत्वाद् असंभावितप्रमादत्वाच्च कर्मणः, कर्म एव कुरु; अकर्मणः ज्ञाननिष्ठायाअपि कर्म एव ज्यायः 'नैष्कर्म्यं पुरुषोऽश्रुते' (गीता 3।4) इति प्रक्रमात् अकर्मशब्देन ज्ञाननिष्ठा एव उच्यते; ज्ञाननिष्ठाधिकारिणः अपि अनभ्यस्तपूर्वतया हि अनियतत्वेन दुःशकत्वात् सप्रमादत्वाच्च ज्ञाननिष्ठायाः कर्मनिष्ठा एव ज्यायसी ।कर्मणि क्रियमाणे च आत्मयाथात्म्यज्ञानेन आत्मनः अकर्तृत्वानुसंधानम् अनन्तरम् एव वक्ष्यते;अत आत्मज्ञानस्य अपि कर्मयोगान्तर्गतत्वात् स एव ज्यायान् इत्यर्थः ।कर्मणो ज्ञाननिष्ठाया ज्यायस्त्ववचनं ज्ञाननिष्ठायाम् अधिकारे सति एव उपपद्यते । यदि सर्वं कर्म परित्यज्य केवलं ज्ञाननिष्ठायाम् अधिकरोषि तर्हि अकर्मणः ते ज्ञाननिष्ठस्य ज्ञाननिष्ठोपकारिणी शरीरयात्रा अपि न सेत्स्यति ।यावत्साधनसमाप्ति शरीरधारणं च अवश्यं कार्यम्; न्यायार्जितधनेन महायज्ञादिकं कृत्वा तच्छिष्टाशनेन एव शरीरधारणं कार्यम्; 'आहारशुद्धौ सत्त्त्वशुद्धिः सत्त्वशुद्धौ ध्रुवा स्मृतिः ।' (छा0 उ0 7।26।2) इत्यादिश्रुतेः । 'भुञ्जते ते त्वघं पापाः' (गीता 3।13) इति च वक्ष्यते । अतो ज्ञाननिष्ठस्य अपि कर्म अकुर्वतो देहयात्रा न सेत्स्यति ।यतो ज्ञाननिष्ठस्य अपि ध्रियमाणशरीरस्य यावत्साधनसमाप्ति महायज्ञादिनित्यनैमित्तिकं कर्म अवश्यं कार्यम् । यतश्च कर्मयोगे अपि आत्मनः अकर्तृत्वभावनया आत्मयाथात्म्यानुसन्धानम् अन्तर्भूतम्; यतश्च प्रकृतिसंसृष्टस्य कर्मयोगः सुशकः अप्रमादश्च, अतो ज्ञाननिष्ठायोग्यस्य अपि ज्ञानयोगात् कर्मयोगो ज्यायान् । तस्मात्त्वं कर्मयोगम् एव कुरु इत्यभिप्रायः । 8 । 'Obligatory' (Niyatam) means 'concomitant' (Vyaptam); for action is concomitant with that which is conjoined with Prakrti or the body. The contact with Prakrti has arisen from beginingless subtle impressions (Vasanas). You must perform work, because the performance of action is easy and may not cause accidents by reason of its being obligatory.Action is superior to non-action, i.e., even to the devotee of Jnana. Because of the instruction at the begining (of this context), 'No man experiences freedom from activity' (3.4), devotion to Jnana alone is indicated by the word, 'Non-action' (Akarma). Even in the case of onequalified for devotion to Jnana, devotion to karma indeed is better because Jnana-nishtha is difficult to perform and liable to accidents, as it has not been practised previously and as it does not come to one naturally. Subsequently it will be described how, One with the knowledge of the true nature of the self can carry on actions along with that knowledge. Consequently, we should take the meaning here to be that, because knowledge of the self too is included in Karma Yoga, this kind of Yoga is superior.This statement on the superiority of activity (KarmaYoga) over Jnana Yoga is valid even when there is competency for one to adopt Jnana Yoga. For, if you abandon all activities to qualify yourself for Jnana Yoga, then, for you, who is thus inactive while following Jnana Yoga, even the nourishment of the body, which is necessary even for Jnana-nishtha, will not be achieved. The body has to be, necessarily sustained until the means are executed to the full. Performing 'great sacrifices' withthe help of honestly earned wealth, the body should be sustained by consuming the remainders left after such sacrifices. This is made clearfrom scriptural texts like, 'When the food is pure, the Sattva (mind or inner organ) becomes pure; when the Sattva is pure, then the remembrance (meditation) will be steady' (Cha.u., 7.26.2). Sri Krshna himself will declare: 'The sinful ones who cook food for their own sake eat sin' (03.13).Consequently, even the sustenance of the body will not be possible in the case of one who practises Jnana-nishtha, and does not act. In other ways also Karma Yoga is superior to Jnana Yoga even in respect of one who is qualified for Jnana-nishtha; for, obligatory and occasional riteslike the 'great sacrifices' must be carried out by one who follows Jnana Yoga too, as he has to sustain the body until he attains perfection. Besides, the understanding of the true nature of the self is incorporated in Karma Yoga, as it involves the contemplation of the self as being a non-agent. It is also in line with the nature of life (Prakrti). KarmaYoga, is for these reasons easier and it is free from danger of downfall. Therefore, you must perform Karma Yoga only. This is the purport of the verse.  
077 एवं तर्हि द्रव्यार्जनादेः कर्मणः अहङ्कारममकारादिसर्वेन्द्रियव्याकुलतागर्भत्वेन अस्य पुरुषस्य कर्मवासनया बन्धनं भविष्यति इति अत्र आह -यज्ञादिशास्त्रीयकर्मशेषभूताद् द्रव्यार्जनादेः कर्मणः अन्यत्र आत्मीयप्रयोजनशेषभूते कर्मणि क्रियमाणे अयं लोकः कर्मबन्धनो भवति । अतः त्वं यज्ञाद्यर्थं द्रव्यार्जनादिकं कर्म समाचर;तत्र आत्मप्रयोजनसाधनतया यः सङ्गः तस्मात् सङ्गात् मुक्तः सन् समाचर ।एवं मुक्तसङ्गेन यज्ञाद्यर्थतया कर्मणि क्रियमाणे यज्ञादिभिः च कर्मभिः आराधितः परमपुरुषः अस्य अनादिकालप्रवृत्तकर्मवासनां समुच्छिद्य अव्याकुलात्मावलोकनं ददाति इत्यर्थः । 9 । If It is contended that any action such as earning money Implies 'I-ness', 'My-ness' etc., and will therefore be disturbing to the senses, and that such a person devoted often to works will be in bondage through subtle impressions of his acts, Sri Krshna says:The world is imprisoned by the bond of work only when work is done for personal ends, but not when work is performed or money acquired for the purpose of sacrifice etc. prescribed in the scriptures. So, for the purpose of sacrifice, you must perform acts like the acquisition of money. In doing so, overcome attachments generated by the pursuit of personal ambitions, and then do your work in the spirit of Yajna. When a person free from attachment does the work for the sake of sacrifices etc., the Supreme Person, propitiated by sacrifices etc., grants him the calm vision of the self after destroying the subtle impressions of hisKarmas, which have continued from time without beginning.  
078 यज्ञशिष्टेन एव सर्वपुरुषार्थसाधननिष्ठानां शरीरधारणकर्तव्यताम् अयज्ञशिष्टेन शरीरधारणं कुर्वतां दोषं च आह -'पतिं विश्वस्य आत्मेश्वरम्' (तै0 ना0 11।3) इत्यादिश्रुतेः निरुपाधिकः प्रजापतिशब्दः सर्वेश्वरं विश्वस्रष्टारं विश्वात्मानं परायणं नारायणम् आह - पुरा सर्गकाले स भगवान् प्रजापतिः अनादिकालप्रवृत्ताचित्संसर्गविवशा उपसंहृतनामरूपविभागाः स्वस्मिन् प्रलीनाः सकलपुरुषार्थानर्हाः चेतनेतरकल्पाः प्रजाः समीक्ष्य परमकारुणिकः तदुज्जिजीवयिषया स्वाराधनभूतयज्ञनिर्वृत्तये यज्ञैः सह ताः सृष्ट्वा एवम् उवाच - अनेन यज्ञेन प्रसविष्यध्वम् आत्मनो वृद्धिं कुरुध्वम् । एष वो यज्ञः परमपुरुषार्थलक्षणमोक्षाख्यस्य कामस्य तदनुगुणानां च कामानां प्रपूरयिता भवतु । 10 । Sri Krshna stresses the need for sustenance of the body solely by the remnants of sacrifices in respect of those who are devoted to all ends of human life. He decries the sin of those who nourish the body by things other than the remnants of sacrifices:As there is the scriptural text beginning with 'The Lord of Universe' (Tai.Na. , 11.3), it is justifiable to take the term Prajapati in its wider connotation and interpret it to mean Narayana who is the Lord of all beings, the creator of the universe and the Self of the universe. In the beginning, i.e., during the creation, He, the Lord of beings, saw all beings:helpless by their conjunction with beginningless non-conscientmatter; bereft of the distinctions of name and form, and submerged in Himself. They were incapable of attaining the major ends of human existence, being almost one with non-conscient matter. He, the supremely compassionate, with a desire to resuscitate them, created them together with sacrifice in order that they might perform sacrificesas His worship and said: 'By this sacrifice, shall you prosper,' i.e., multiply and prosper. May this sacrifice fulfil your supreme object of desire called release (Moksha) and also the other desires that are in conformity with it.  
079 कथम् -अनेन देवताराधनभूतेन देवान् मच्छरीरभूतान् मदात्मकान् आराधयत 'अहं हि सर्वयज्ञानां भोक्ता च प्रभुरेव च' (गीता 9।24) इति वक्ष्यते । यज्ञेन आराधिताः ते देवा मदात्मकाःस्वाराधनापेक्षितान्नपानाद्यैः युष्मान् पुष्णन्तु । एवं परस्परं भावयन्तः परं श्रेयो मोक्षाख्यम् अवाप्स्यथ । 11 । How, then, should this be done? 'By this,' i.e., by this sacrifice, you propitiate the gods who form My body and have Me as their Self. For Sri Krshna will say later on: 'For I am the only enjoyer and the only Lord of Sacrifices' (9.24). Worshipped by sacrifices, may these gods, who have Me as their Self, nourish you with food, drink etc., which are required also for their worship. Thus, supporting each other, may you attain the highest good called Moksha (release).  
080 यज्ञभाविताः यज्ञेन आराधिताः मदात्मका देवा इष्टान् भोगान् वो दास्यन्ते परमपुरुषार्थलक्षणं मोक्षं साधयतां ये इष्टा भोगाः तान् पूर्वपूर्वयज्ञभाविता देवा दास्यन्ते । उत्तरोत्तराराधनापेक्षितान् सर्वान् भोगान् वो दास्यन्ति इत्यर्थः ।स्वाराधनार्थतया तैः दत्तान् भोगान् तेभ्यः अप्रदाय यो भुङ्क्ते चोर एव सः । चौर्यं हि नाम अन्यदीये तत्प्रयोजनाय एवपरिकॢप्ते वस्तुनि स्वकीयताबुद्धिं कृत्वा तेन स्वात्मपोषणम् ।अतः अस्य न परमपुरुषार्थानर्हतामात्रम्, अपि तु निरयगामित्वं च भविष्यति इत्यभिप्रायः । 12 । 'Pleased by the sacrifice,' i.e., propitiated by the sacrifice, the gods, who have Me as their Self, will bestow on you the enjoyments you desire. Whatever objects are desired by persons keen on attaining release, the supreme end of human endeavour, all those will be granted by gods previously worshipped through many sacrifices. That is, whatever is solicited with more and more propitiation, all those enjoyments they will bestow on you. Whoever enjoys the objects of enjoyment granted by them for their purpose of worshipping them, without giving them theirdue share in return - he is verily a thief. What is called 'theft' is indeed taking what belongs to another as one's own and using it for oneself, when it is really designed for the purpose of another. The purport is that such a person becomes unfit not only for the supreme end of human endeavour, but also will go down towards purgatory (Naraka).  
081 तद् एव विवृणोति -इन्द्राद्यात्मना अवस्थितपरमपुरुषाराधनार्थतया एव द्रव्याणि उपादाय विपच्य तैः यथावस्थितं परमपुरुषम् आराध्य तच्छिष्टाशनेन ये शरीरयात्रां कुर्वते, ते तु अनादिकालोपार्जितैः किल्बिषैःआत्मयाथात्म्यावलोकनविरोधिभिः सर्वैः विमुच्यन्ते ।ये तु परमपुरुषेण इन्द्राद्यात्मना स्वाराधनाय दत्तानाम् आत्मार्थतया उपादाय विपच्य अश्नन्ति ते पापात्मानः अघम् एव भुञ्जते । अघपरिणामित्वाद् अघम् इति उच्यते । आत्मावलोकन-विमुखा नरकाय एव पच्यन्ते । 13 । Sri Krshna expands the same:Those persons who acquire food materials solely for propitiating the Supreme Person abiding as the Self of Indra and other deities, and who, after cooking them, propitiate through them, the Supreme Person as He is, and then sustain themselves on the remnants of oblations (made for such propitiation), they alone will be free of impurities which have resulted from beginningless evil and which are inimical to the vision of the self. But they are evil-minded, who acquire for selfish use the things which the SupremeBeing, abiding as the Self of lndra and other deities, has granted them for worshipping Him with, and use it all on the other hand for feeding themselves - they eat only sin. Turning away from the vision of the self, they cook only for being led to Naraka (for the expiation of the sin incurred thereby).  
082 पुनरपि लोकदृष्ट्या शास्त्रदृष्ट्या च सर्वस्य यज्ञमूलत्वं दर्शयित्वा यज्ञानुवर्तनस्य अवश्यकार्यताम् अननुवर्तने च दोषं च आह -अन्नात् सर्वाणि भूतानि भवन्ति पर्जन्याद् अन्नसंभवः इति सर्वलोकसाक्षिकम् । यज्ञात् पर्जन्यो भवति इति च शास्त्रेण अवगम्यते - 'अग्नौ प्रास्ताहुतिः सम्यगादित्यमुपतिष्ठते । आदित्याज्जायतेवृष्टिर्वृष्टेरन्नं ततः प्रजाः ।।' (मुन0 3।76) इत्यादिना । यज्ञः च द्रव्यार्जनादिकर्तृपुरुषव्यापार-रूपकर्मसमुद्भवः । 14 । Sri Krshna says that, from the standpoint of the world as well as that of the scriptures, everything has its origin in sacrifice; and He speaks of the need for the performance of the sacrifices and of the blemish in not performing the same:From food arise all beings; from rain food is produced. These two facts are matters of common experience. 'From sacrifice comes rain' this is known from the scriptures such as, 'The oblations offered in fire reach the sun, and from the sun comes rain' (Manu, 6.76), and sacrifice is born out of activities in the form of collecting materials, etc., by theagent. And activity arises from 'Brahman', the body born of Prakrti.  
083 कर्म ब्रह्मोद्भवम् । अत्र च ब्रह्मशब्दनिर्दिष्टं प्रकृतिपरिणामरूपशरीरम् 'तस्मादेतद् ब्रह्म नाम रूपमन्नं च जायते' (मु0 1।1।9) इति ब्रह्मशब्देन प्रकृतिः निर्दिष्टा । इहापि 'मम योनिर्महद्ब्रह्म' (गीता 14।3) इति वक्ष्यते । अतः कर्म ब्रह्मोद्भवम् इति प्रकृतिपरिणामरूपशरीरोद्भवं कर्म इत्युक्तं भवति । ब्रह्म अक्षरसमुद्भवम्, इत्यत्र अक्षरशब्दनिर्दिष्टो जीवात्मा, अन्नपानादिना तृप्ताक्षराधिष्ठितं शरीरं कर्मणे प्रभवति, इति कर्मसाधनभूतं शरीरम् अक्षरसमुद्भवम् । तस्मात् सर्वगतं ब्रह्म सर्वाधिकारिगतं शरीरं नित्यं यज्ञे प्रतिष्ठितम् यज्ञमूलम् इत्यर्थः । 15 । Here the term, ' Brahman' connotes the physical body consisting of modifications of the Prakrti; for the Prakrti is denoted here by the term 'Brahman', as in the scriptural text: 'From Him arises, this Brahman and this' Brahman' becomes name, form and food' (Mun.U., 1.1.9). Here alsoit will be said by Sri Krshna: 'This great' Brahman' is my womb' (14.3). Therefore, the words that Activity springs from 'Brahman' teaches that activity is produced by the physical body which is of the nature of the modification of Prakrti. The 'Brahman' arises from the imperishable self.Here the term, 'imperishable', indicates the individual self. The physical body, which is inhabited by the self who is satisfied by food and drink, is fit for action; hence the physical body which constitutes the instrumentof activity is said to be from the imperishable. Therefore, the 'all-pervading Brahman' means here the bodies of all persons of diversekinds which are the products of Prakrti which comprises all material entities, and is hence all-pervading. They, the bodies, are established in sacrifice. The meaning is that the bodies have roots in sacrifice.  
084 एवं परमपुरुषेण प्रवर्तितम् इदं चक्रम् 'अन्नाद् भवन्ति भूतानि' इत्यत्र भूतशब्दनिर्दिष्टानि सजीवानि शरीरीणि । पर्जन्यादन्नम्, यज्ञात् पर्जन्यः, यज्ञश्च कर्तृव्यापारानुरूपात् कर्मणः, कर्म च सजीवात् शरीरात्, सजीवं शरीरं च पुनरन्नाद् इति अन्योन्यकार्यकारणभावेन चक्रवत् परिवर्तमानम् - इह साधने वर्तमानो यः कर्मयोगाधिकारी ज्ञानयोगाधिकारी वा न अनुवर्तयति न प्रवर्तयति, यज्ञशिष्टेन देहधारणम् अकुर्वन् सः अघायुः भवति, अघारम्भाय एव अस्य आयुः,अघपरिणतं वा, उभयरूपं वा, सः अघायुः ।अत एव इन्द्रियारामो भवति, न आत्मारामः; इन्द्रियाणि एव अस्य उद्यानानि भवन्ति,अयज्ञशिष्टवर्धितदेहमनस्त्वेन उद्रिक्तरजस्तमस्कः आत्मावलोकनविमुखतया विषयभोगैकरतिः भवति, अतो ज्ञानयोगादौ यतमानः अपि निष्फलप्रयत्नतया मोघं पार्थ स जीवति । 16 । Thus this wheel is set inmotion by the Supreme Person: From food arise embodied selves which are denoted by the word 'beings': from rain food; from sacrifice rain; sacrifice from activities which constitute the exercise of an agent; and activity from the embodied self; and again the bodyendowed with life from food. In this manner there is a sequence which revolves like a wheel through the mutual relations of cause and effect.Hence, he who is engaged in spiritual practice - whether one is qualified for Karma Yoga or Jnana Yoga - if he does not follow, i.e., does not keep in motion the wheel which revolves in a circle through mutual relation of cause and effect - that person by not maintaining his bodily subsistence by means of the 'remainder of sacrifice,' lives in sin. His life begins in sin or develops in sin, or is of both these kinds; he lives the life of sin. Thus he is a reveller in his senses and not in his self. The senses become the pleasure-gardens of one whose mind and body are notnourished by the 'remainders of sacrifices.' Rajas and Tamas preponderate in his body. Being thus turned away from the vision of the self, he rejoices only in the enjoyment of the senses. Therefore, even if he were to attempt for the vision of the self, it will be fruitless. So he lives in vain, O! Arjuna.  
085 असाधनायत्तात्मदर्शनस्य मुक्तस्य एव महायज्ञादिवर्णाश्रमोचितकर्मानारम्भ इत्याह -यः तु ज्ञानयोगकर्मयोगसाधननिरपेक्षः स्वत एव आत्मरतिः आत्माभिमुखः आत्मना एव तृप्तः, न अन्नपानादिभिः आत्मव्यतिरिक्तैः, आत्मनि एव च सन्तुष्टः, न उद्यानस्रक्चन्दनगीतवादित्र-नृत्यादौ, धारणपोषणभोग्यादिकं सर्वम् आत्मा एव यस्य तस्य आत्मदर्शनाय कर्तव्यं न विद्यते;स्वत एव सर्वदा दृष्टात्मस्वरूपत्वात् । 17 । Sri Krshna now says that there is no need for the performance of the 'great sacrifices' etc., according to his station and stage of life, only in respect of a liberated person whose vision of the self does not depend on any external means.But for him, who is not in need of the means of JnanaYoga and Karma Yoga, who finds delight in the self on his own, i.e., who is established in the self, who is satisfied by the self alone and not by food, drink and other things which are other than the self, who rejoices in the self alone and not in pleasure gardens, garlands, sandalpaste, vocal and instrumentalmusic etc., and for whom everything, his subsistence, nourishment and enjoyment, is the self alone - for him nothing remains to be performed for the vision of the self, because the essential nature of the self is perpetually in his unaided vision.  
086 अत एव तस्य आत्मदर्शनाय कृतेन तत्साधनेन न अर्थः -  न किंचित् प्रयोजनम्, अकृतेन आत्मदर्शनसाधनेन न कश्चिद् अनर्थः - असाधनायत्तात्मदर्शनत्वात् । स्वत एवात्मव्यतिरिक्त-सकलाचिद्वस्तुविमुखस्य अस्य सर्वेषु प्रकृतिपरिणामविशेषेषु आकाशादिषु भूतेषु सकार्येषु न कश्चित् प्रयोजनतया साधनतया वा व्यपाश्रयः, यतः तद्विमुखीकरणाय साधनारम्भः,स हि मुक्त एव । 18 । Thus, for such a one there is no purpose, i.e., nothing to be gained from work done as a means for the vision of the self, nor is he subject to any evil or calamity from work left undone, because his vision of the self does not rest on any external means. To such a person who has turned by himself away from non-intelligent matter which is different from the self, there is nothing acceptable as a purpose to be gained from the constituents of Prakrti and their products; only if there were such a purpose, there would be the need for the means of retreat therefrom. For, the adoption of the means is only for effecting such a retreat. But he is verily liberated.  
087 यस्माद् असाधनायत्तात्मदर्शनस्य एव साधनाप्रवृत्तिः, यस्मात् च साधने प्रवृत्तस्य अपि सुशकत्वाद् अप्रमादत्वात् तदन्तर्गतात्मयाथात्म्यामुसन्धानत्वाद् च ज्ञानयोगिनः अपि देहयात्रायाः कर्मानुवृत्त्यपेक्षत्वात् च कर्मयोग एव आत्मदर्शननिर्वृत्तौ श्रेयान् -तस्माद् असङ्गपूर्वकं कार्यम् इत्येव सततं यावदात्मप्राप्ति कर्म एव समाचर । असक्तः कार्यम् इति वक्ष्यमाणाकर्तृत्वानुसन्धानपूर्वकं च कर्म अनुचरन् पूरुषः कर्मयोगेन एव परम् आप्नोति आत्मानं प्राप्नोति इत्यर्थः । 19 । Non-pursuit of the means for vision of the self is only for that person whose vision of the self no longer depends on any means. But Karma Yoga is better in gaining the vision of the self for one who is in pursuit of the means for that vision, because it is easy to perform, because it is secure from possible error, because the contemplation of the true nature of the self is included in it, and because even for a Jnana Yogin the performance of minimum activity is necessary. For these reasons, Karma Yoga is better as a means for the vision of the Atman.Therefore, considering that work has to be performed with detachment, you perform it, considering yourself a non-agent. This will be declared in the words 'with detachment' and 'which ought to be done,' meaning that one attains the Supreme by Karma Yoga itself.  
088 यतो ज्ञानयोगाधिकारिणः अपि कर्मयोग एव आत्मदर्शने श्रेयान्, अत एव हि जनकादयो राजर्षयो ज्ञानिनाम् अग्रेसराः कर्मयोगेन एव संसिद्धिम् आस्थिताः, आत्मानं  प्राप्तवन्तः ।एवं प्रथमं मुमुक्षोः ज्ञानयोगानर्हतया कर्मयोगाधिकारिणः कर्मयोग एव कार्यः, इत्युक्त्वा ज्ञानयोगाधिकारिणः अपि ज्ञानयोगात् कर्मयोग एव श्रेयान् इति सहेतुकम् उक्तम् । इदानीं शिष्टतया व्यपदेश्यस्य सर्वथा कर्मयोग एव कार्य इति उच्यते - लोकसंग्रहं पश्यन् अपि कर्म एव कर्तुम् अर्हसि । 20 । It is also declared that by Karma Yoga alone Janaka and others reached perfection. Because, Karma Yoga is the best means for securing the vision of the self even for a person who is qualified for Jnana Yoga, royal sages like Janaka and others, who are foremost among the Jnanins, preferred Karma Yoga as the means for attaining perfection.Thus, having first declared previously that Karma Yoga must be practised by an aspirant for release who is qualified for Karma Yoga alone, as he is unfit for Jnana Yoga, it was next stated with reasons that, even for one who is qualified for Jnana Yoga, Karma Yoga is better than Inana Yoga. Now it is going to be declared (in verses 20-26) that KarmaYoga must be performed in every way by one who is virtuous.At least for the guidance of the world, you should do work even if there is no need of it for yourself.  
089 श्रेष्ठः कृत्स्नशास्त्रज्ञातृतया अनुष्ठातृतया च प्रथितो यद् यद् आचरति तत् तद् एव अकृत्स्नविद् जनः अपि आचरति । अनुष्ठीयमानम् अपि कर्म श्रेष्ठो यत्प्रमाणं यदङ्गयुक्तम् अनुतिष्ठति,तदङ्गयुक्तम् एव अकृत्स्नविद् लोकः अपि अनुतिष्ठति; अतो लोकरक्षार्थं शिष्टतया प्रथितेनश्रेष्ठेन स्ववर्णाश्रमोचितं कर्म सकलं  सर्वदा अनुष्ठेयम् । अन्यथा लोकनाशजनितं पापं ज्ञानयोगाद् अपि एनं प्रच्यावयेत् । 21 । Whatever 'an eminent man,' i.e., he, who is famous for his knowledge of all the scriptures and for his observance of the scriptural dictates, performs, others who have incomplete knowledge of the scriptures will also perform, following his example; With regard to any duty which is being performed with all its ancillaries by an eminent personage, the people with incomplete knowledge will do it with the same ancillaries. Therefore for the protection of the world, all acts that are appropriate to one's station and stage in life must always be performed by an eminentman who is distinguished for his wisdom. Otherwise, the evil generated from the ruin of the large masses of the world (who neglect their duties by following his example), will bring him down, even if he were a follower of pure Jnana Yoga.  
090 न मे सर्वेश्वरस्य अवाप्तसमस्तकामस्य सर्वज्ञस्य सत्यसंकल्पस्य त्रिषु लोकेषु देवमनुष्यादिरूपेण स्वच्छन्दतो वर्तमानस्य किंचिद् अपि कर्तव्यम् अस्ति, यतः अनवाप्तं कर्मणा अवाप्तव्यं न किंचिद् अपि अस्ति, अथापि लोकरक्षायै कर्मणि एव वर्ते । 22 । For Me, who is the Lord of all, who has all desires fulfilled, who is omniscient, whose will is always true, and who, at My own will, remains in the three worlds in the forms of gods, men and such other beings, there is nothing whatever to achieve. Therefore though there is for Me nothing 'unacquired', i.e., nothing yet to be acquired by work, I go on working for the protection of the world.  
091 अहं सर्वेश्वरः सत्यसंकल्पः स्वसंकल्पकृतजगदुदयविभवलयलीलः स्वच्छन्दतो जगुदुपकृतये मर्त्यो जातः अपि मनुष्येषु शिष्टजनाग्रेसरवसुदेवगृहे अवतीर्णः तत्कुलोचिते कर्मणि अतन्द्रितः सर्वदा यदि न वर्तेयम्, मम शिष्टजनाग्रेसरवसुदेवसूनोः वर्त्म अकृत्स्नविदः शिष्टाः च सर्वप्रकारेण 'अयम् एव धर्मः' इति अनुवर्तन्ते ते च स्वकर्तव्याननुष्ठानेन अकरणे प्रत्यवायेन च आत्मानम् अनुपलभ्य निरयगामिनो भवेयुः । 23 । If I, the Lord of all, whose will is always true, whose sport consists in creation, sustentation and dissolution of universe at My will, even though I am born at My pleasure as a man to help the world - if I, thus incarnating in the family of Vasudeva who is the foremost among virtuous men, did not continue to work unwearied at all times suitable to that family, then, these men with incomplete knowledge would follow My path, thinking that the way adopted by the son of virtuous Vasudeva alone is the real way. And in place of winning the self, they would go to Naraka because of their failure to do what ought to be done and also because of the sin arising from non-performance of duty.  
092 अहं कुलोचितं कर्म न चेत् कुर्याम् एवम् एव सर्वे शिष्टलोका मदाचारायत्तधर्मनिश्चया अकरणाद् एव उत्सीदेयुः - नष्टा भवेयुः, शास्त्रीयाचाराणाम् अपालनात् सर्वेषां शिष्टकुलानां संकरस्य च कर्ता स्याम्, अत एव इमाः प्रजा उपहन्याम् ।एवम् एव त्वम् अपि शिष्टजनाग्रेसरपाण्डुतनयः युधिष्ठिरानुजः अर्जुनः सन् शिष्टतया यदि ज्ञाननिष्ठायाम् अधिकरोषि ततः त्वदाचारानुवर्तिनः अकृत्स्नविदः शिष्टाः च मुमुक्षवः  स्वाधिकारम् अजानन्तः कर्मनिष्ठायाम् अनधिकुर्वन्तो विनश्येयुः, अतो व्यपदेश्येन विदुषाकर्म एव कर्तव्यम् । 24 । If I do not do the work suitable to My station in life, likewise all the virtuous men also, neglecting their duties by following My example, would be destroyed on account of not performing their duties. That is, they will become lost. Thus I would be bringing about chaos among all virtuous men on account of My failure to conduct Myself as prescribed in the scriptures. Therefore I would be destroying all these people. Even so, If you, Arjuna, a son of Pandu and a brother of Yudhisthira and the foremost of the virtuous, claim to be qualified for Jnana Yoga, then the virtuous aspirants, who do not know everything and who follow your way, without knowing their own competency, would give up practising Karma Yoga and will be lost. Therefore work should be done by one who is recognised as learned and worthy.  
093 अविद्वांसः आत्मनि अकृत्स्नविदः कर्मणि सक्ताः कर्मणि अवर्जनीयसंबन्धाः, आत्मनि अकृत्स्नवित्तया तदभ्यासरूपज्ञानयोगे अनधिकृताः, कर्मयोगाधिकारिणः कर्मयोगम् एव यथा आत्मदर्शनाय कुर्वते, तथा आत्मनि कृत्स्ववित्तया कर्मणि असक्तः ज्ञानयोगाधिकारयोग्यःअपि व्यपेदेश्यः शिष्टः, लोकरक्षणार्थं स्वाचारेण शिष्टलोकानां धर्मनिश्चयं चिकीर्षुः कर्मयोगम् एव कुर्यात् । 25 । 'The ignorant' are those people who do not know the entire truth about the self; 'attached to their work' means they are inseparably yoked to work. Because of the incomplete knowledge of the self, they are not qualified for Jnana Yoga which is of the nature of practising knowledgeof the self. They are qualified for Karma Yoga only. As they should practise Karma Yoga for the vision of the self in the same manner Karma Yoga should be practised by one who is recognised as virtuous, who is unattached towork by reason of the vision of the self, and who wishes that his conduct should give guidance to others in virtuous conduct. In this way he should protect the world from chaos by his example. Such a person, even though qualified for Jnana Yoga, should practise Karma Yoga.  
094 अज्ञानाम् आत्मन्यकृत्स्नवित्तया ज्ञानयोगोपादानाशक्तानां मुमुक्षूणां कर्मसङ्गिनाम् अनादिकर्मवासनया कर्मणि एव नियतत्वेन कर्मयोगाधिकारिणां 'कर्मयोगाद् अन्यथाआत्मावलोकनम् अस्ति' इति न बुद्धिभेदं जनयेत् । किं तर्हि? आत्मनि कृत्स्नवित्तया ज्ञानयोगशक्तः अपि पूर्वोक्तरीत्या 'कर्मयोग एव ज्ञानयोगनिरपेक्ष आत्मावलोकनसाधनम्'इति बुद्ध्या युक्तः कर्म एव आचरन् सर्वकर्मसु अकृत्स्नविदां प्रीतिं जनयेत् । 26 । Do not bewilder the minds of ignorant aspirants by saying that there is, besides Karma Yoga, another way to the vision of the self. They cannot practise Jnana Yoga on account of their incomplete knowledge of the self, and attachment to action. They are qualified for Karma Yogabecause of their being fit only for activity on account of the subtle impressions of their beginningless Karma. What then follows from this? It is this: Even though one is qualified for Jnana Yoga because of the complete knowledge of the self, one should do work, holding the view as said previously that Karma Yoga by itself without Jnana Yoga is an independent means for the vision of the self. He should thus generate love for all types of activity among those who do not know the complete truth.  
095 अथ कर्मयोगम् अनुतिष्ठतो विदुषः अविदुषश्च विशेषं प्रदर्शयन् कर्मयोगापेक्षितम् आत्मनः अकर्तृत्वानुसन्धानप्रकारम् उपदिशति -प्रकृतेः गुणैः सत्त्वादिभिः स्वानुरूपं क्रियमाणानि कर्माणि प्रति अहंकारविमूढात्मा अहं कर्ता इति मन्यते । अहंकारेण विमूढः आत्मा यस्य असौ अहंकारविमूढात्मा; अहंकारो नाम अनहमर्थेप्रकृतौ अहम् इति अभिमानः, तेन अज्ञातात्मस्वरूपो गुणकर्मसु अहं कर्ता इति मन्यते इत्यर्थः । 27 । Sri Krshna declares (in the verses 27 to 30) the way in which the self is to be contemplated on as not being an agent as required by Karma Yoga, after demonstrating the difference between the enlightened and unenlightened among those practising Karma Yoga.It is the Gunas of Prakrti like Sattva, Rajas etc., that perform all the activities appropriate to them. But the man, whose nature is deluded by his Ahankara, thinks, 'I am the doer of all these actions'. Ahankara is the mistaken conception of 'I' applied to the workings of Prakrti which is not the 'I'. The meaning is that it is because of this (Ahankara), that one who is ignorant of the real nature of the self, thinks, 'I am the doer' with regard to the activities that are really being done by the Gunas of Prakrti.  
096 गुणकर्मविभागयोः सत्त्वादिगुणविभागे तत्तत्कर्मविभागे च तत्त्ववित्, गुणाः सत्त्वादयः स्वगुणेषु स्वेषु कार्येषु वर्तन्ते इति मन्वा गुणकर्मसु अहं कर्ता इति न सज्जते । 28 । But he who knows the truth about the divisions of the Gunas and their actions - namely, about the division among Sattva etc., on the one hand, and the divisions among their respective functionings on the other hand - it is he who, realising that Gunas, i.e., Sattva etc., are operating on their own products, is not attached to the actions of the Gunas, being convinced, 'I am not the doer.'  
097 अकृत्स्नविदः तु आत्मदर्शनाय प्रवृत्ताः प्रकृतिसंसृष्टतया प्रकृतेः गुणैः यथावस्थितात्मनि संमूढाः गुणकर्मसु क्रियासु एव सज्जन्ते, न तद्विविक्तात्मस्वरूपे; अतः ते ज्ञानयोगाय न प्रभवन्ति, इति कर्मयोगे एव तेषाम् अधिकारः । एवंभूतान् तान् मन्दान् अकृत्स्नविदः कृत्स्नवित् स्वयं ज्ञानयोगावस्थानेन न विचालयेत् । ते किल मन्दाः श्रेष्ठजनाचारानुवर्तिनः कर्मयोगाद् उत्थितम् एनं दृष्ट्वा कर्मयोगात् प्रचलितमनसो भवेयुः । अतः श्रेष्ठः स्वयम् अपि कर्मयोगे तिष्ठन् आत्मयाथात्म्यज्ञानेन आत्मनः अकर्तृत्वम् अनुसन्दधानः 'कर्मयोग एव आत्मावलोकने निरपेक्षसाधनम्' इति दर्शयित्वा तान् अकृत्स्नविदो मन्दान् जोषयेद् इत्यर्थः ।ज्ञानयोगाधिकारिणः अपि ज्ञानयोगाद् अस्य एव कर्मयोगस्य ज्यायस्त्वं पूर्वम् एव उक्तम् । अतो व्यपदेश्यो लोकसंग्रहाय कर्म एव कुर्यात् । प्रकृतिविविक्तात्मस्वभावनिरूपणेन गुणेषु कर्तृत्वम् आरोप्य कर्मानुष्ठानप्रकार उक्तः । गुणेषु कर्तृत्वानुसन्धानं च इदम् एव 'आत्मनो न स्वरूपप्रयुक्तम् इदम् कर्तृत्वम्, अपि तु गुणसम्बन्धकृतम्' इति प्राप्ताप्राप्तविवेकेन गुणकृतम् - इति अनुसन्धानम् । 29 । Those who 'do not know the whole truth' are those persons who are trying for the vision of the self but are deluded about the nature of the self, not knowing, on account of their involvement in Prakrti, that actions proceed from the Gunas of Prakrti. They are therefore attached to the actions of the Gunas - i.e., only to actions forming part of Karma Yoga. They are qualified only for Karma Yoga. One who knows the complete truth should not, by himself remaining a practitioner of Jnana Yoga, unsettle those persons who are ignorant and who do not know the complete truth. Those, the ignorant, who tend to follow the behaviour of a great man, when they see him transcend Karma Yoga, will have their minds shaken from KarmaYoga, thus, the great man, should himself remain established in Karma Yoga, while having the full knowledge ofthe true nature of the self and contemplating on the self as not being the agent. Thus he should demonstrate that Karma Yoga by itself is an autonomous means for the vision of the self, He should create in those who do not know the complete truth the love of Karma Yoga.The superiority of this Karma Yoga over Jnana Yoga even for those who are qualified for Jnana Yoga has already been stated. Therefore, one who is a respected person of note should follow this Karma Yoga alone for the good of the world. The method of performing actions afterattributing agency to the Gunas by discerning the nature of the self as different from Prakrti, has been taught. The agency of the self is not produced by the inherent nature of the self, but by its contact with the Gunas. Hence by discriminating between what is obtained by contact and not obtained when there is no contact, it has to be understood that this agency is due to the Gunas of Prakrti.  
098 इदानीम् आत्मनां परमपुरुषशरीरतया तन्नियाम्यत्वस्वरूपनिरूपणेन भगवति पुरुषोत्तमे सर्वात्मभूते गुणकृतं च कर्तृत्वम् आरोप्य कर्मकर्तव्यता उत्यते -मयि सर्वेश्वरे सर्वभूतान्तरात्मभूते सर्वाणि कर्माणि अध्यात्मचेतसा संन्यस्य निराशीः निर्ममो विगतज्वरः युद्धादिकं सर्वं चोदितं कर्म कुरुष्व । आत्मनि यत् चेतः तद् अध्यात्मचेतः, आत्मस्वरूपविषयेण श्रुतिशतसिद्धेन ज्ञानेन इत्यर्थः ।'अन्तः प्रविष्टः शास्ता जनानां सर्वात्मा...अन्तः प्रविष्टं कर्तारमेतम्' (तै0 आ0 3।11) 'य आत्मनि तिष्ठन्नात्मनोऽन्तरो यमात्मा न वेद यस्यात्मा शरीरं य आत्मानमन्तरो यमयति स त आत्मान्तर्याम्यमृतः' (बृ0 5।7 मा0 दि0) इत्येवमाद्याः श्रुतयः परमपुरुषप्रवर्त्यं तच्छरीरभूतम् एनम् आत्मानं परमपुरुषं च प्रवर्तयितारम् आचक्षते । स्मृतयश्च - 'प्रशासितारं सर्वेषाम्' (मनु0 12।122) इत्याद्याः । 'सर्वस्य चाहं हृदि सन्निविष्टः' (गीता 15।15) 'ईश्वरः सर्वभूतानां हृद्देशेऽर्जुन तिष्ठति । भ्रामयन् सर्वभूतानि यन्त्रारूढानि मायया ।।' (गीता 18।61) इति वक्ष्यते ।अतो मच्छरीरतया मत्प्रवर्त्यात्मस्वरूपानुसन्धानेन सर्वाणि कर्माणि मया एव क्रियमाणानि इति मयि परमपुरुषे संन्यस्य तानि च  केवलं मदाराधनानि इति कृत्वा तत्फले निराशीः तत एव तत्र कर्मणि ममतारहितो भूत्वा विगतज्वरो युद्धादिकं कुरुष्व ।स्वकीयेन आत्मना कर्त्रा स्वकीयैः एव करणैः स्वाराधनैकप्रयोजनाय परमपुरुषः सर्वेश्वरः सर्वशेषी स्वयम् एव स्वकर्माणि कारयति; इति अनुसन्धाय कर्मसु ममतारहितः प्राचीनेन अनादिकालप्रवृत्तानन्तपापसञ्चयेन 'कथम् अहं भविष्यामि' इत्येवं भूतान्तर्ज्वरविनिर्मुक्तः 'परमपुरुष एव कर्मभिः आराधितो बन्धात् मोचयिष्यति' इति स्मरन् सुखेन कर्मयोगम् एवकुरुष्व इत्यर्थः ।'तमीश्वराणां परमं महेश्वरं तं देवतानां परमं च दैवतम् ।' (श्वेता3।7) 'पतिं विश्वस्य' (म0 ना0 3।1) 'पतिं पतीनाम्' (श्वेता0 6।7) इत्यादिश्रुतिसिद्धं हि सर्वेश्वरत्वं सर्वशेषित्वं च । ईश्वरत्वं नियन्तृत्वम्, शेषित्वम् पतित्वम् । 30 । Now it is said that the agency of works, first attributed to Gunas, ultimately go to the Supreme Person who is the Self of all. It is done by discerning that the nature of the individual selves is one of subservience to the Supreme Person, as they constitute His body.Do all prescribed acts such as war etc., (here a duty) free from desire or selfishness and devoid of fear, with a mind focussed on the self. Surrender all acts to Me, the Lord of all, who constitutes the inner pervading Self of all beings. 'Adhyatma-cetas' is that mind which is focussed on the self by knowledge of the essential nature of the self as declared in hundreds of Vedic texts. That this individual self constitutes the body of the Supreme Self and is actuated by Him, is taught by Sruti texts like: 'He who has entered within, is the ruler of all beings and is the Self of all' (Tai.Ar., 3.11), 'Him who has entered inside and is the doer' (Ibid, , 3.23), he who, dwelling in the self, is within the self, whom the Self does not know, whose body is the self, who controls the self from within - He is your internal ruler and Immortal Self' (Br .U ., 3.7.22). Smrti texts also speak in the samemanner: 'Him who is the ruler of all' (Manu, 12.122). Sri Krshna will say later on: 'And I am seated in the hearts of all; from Me are memory, knowledge and the faculty of reason' (15.15); 'The Lord, O Arjuna, lives in the heart of everything causing them to spin round and round by His power, as if set on a wheel' (18.61). Hence, dedicate to Me, the Supreme Person, all actions considering them as done by Me, by contemplating on the self as actuated by Me by reason of Its constituting My body. And do every thing, considering the actions as My worship only; becoming free from desire for fruits and therefore free, from selfishness as regards actions', engage in acts like war etc., devoid of 'fever', i.e., the excitement caused by passions like anger.Contemplate that the Supreme Person, Lord of all, principal of all, gets done his own works only for the purpose of getting Himself worshipped with His own instruments, namely, the individual selves which belong to Him and are His agents. Become free from selfish attachment to action. Also be free from the feverish concern originating from such thoughts as 'What will become of me with an ancient, endless accumulation of evil arising from beginningless time?' Perform Karma Yoga with ease, for the Supreme Person Himself, worshipped by acts, will free you from bondage. His Lordship and Principalship over all are settled by Sruti texts like: 'Him who is the supreme and great Lord of lords, Him the Supreme Divinity of divinities' (Sve.U., 6,7), 'The Lord of the Universe' (Tai.na., 11.3), 'The Supreme Ruler of rulers' (Sve. U ',6.6- 7). Isvaratva is the same as Seshitva, which means controllership.  
099 अयम् एव साक्षाद् उपनिषत्सारभूतः अर्थः इति आह -  ये मानवाः आत्मनिष्ठशास्त्राधिकारिणः 'अयम् एव शास्त्रार्थः' इत्येतत् मे मतं निश्चित्य तथा अनुतिष्ठन्ति, ये च अननुतिष्ठन्तः अपि अस्मिन् शास्त्रार्थे श्रद्दधाना भवन्ति, ये च अश्रद्दधानाअपि 'एवं शास्त्रार्थो न संभवति' इति न अभ्यसूयन्ति, अस्मिन् महागुणे शास्त्रार्थे दोषदर्शिनो न भवन्ति इत्यर्थः; ते सर्वे बन्धहेतुभिः अनादिकालप्रारब्धैः कर्मभिः मुच्यन्ते । ते अपि कर्मभिः, इति अपिशब्दाद् एषां पृथक्करणम् । इदानीम् अननुतिष्ठन्तः अपि अस्मिन् शास्त्रार्थे श्रद्दधानाअनभ्यसूयवः च श्रद्धया च अनसूयया च क्षीणपापा अचिरेण इमम् एव शास्त्रार्थम् अनुष्ठाय मुच्यन्ते इत्यर्थः । 31 । Sri Krshna declares that this alone is the essential meaningof the Upanishads:There are those persons who are qualified to understand the Sastras and decide for themselves what is My doctrine, and follow them accordingly;there are others who are full of faith in the meaning of the Sastras without however practising it. And there are still others who, even though devoid of faith, do not cavil at it, saying that the true meaning of the Sastras cannot be this, i.e., they do not find any blemish pertainingto the Sastras which possess great qualities. All these persons are freed from Karmas which are there from beginningless time and which cause bondage. By the term, api (even) in 'te'pi karmabhih' ('even they from Karmas'), these men are divided into three groups. The meaning is that those who, even if they do not act upon the meaning but still believe in this meaning of the Sastras and do not cavil at it, will be cleansed of their evil by their faith and freedom from fault-finding. For, if they have faith they will, before long, take to the practice of this very meaning of the Sastras and be freed.  
100 भगवदभिमतम् औपनिषदम् अर्थम् अननुतिष्ठताम् अश्रद्दधानानाम् अभ्यसूयतां च दोषम् आह - ये तु एतत् सर्वम् आत्मवस्तु मच्छरीरतया मदाधारं मच्छेषभूतं मदेकप्रवर्त्त्यम् इति मे मतं न अनुतिष्ठन्ति न एवम् अनुसन्धाय सर्वाणि कर्माणि कुर्वते, ये च न श्रद्दधते, ये च अभ्यसूयन्तोवर्तन्ते, तान् सर्वेषु ज्ञानेषु विशेषेण मूढान् तत एव नष्टान् अचेतसो विद्धि । चेतः कार्यं हि वस्तुयाथात्म्यनिश्चयः, तदभावाद् अचेतसः विपरीतज्ञानाः सर्वत्र विमूढाश्च । 32 । Sri Krshna now speaks of the evil that will befall those who do not practise this instruction of the Upanishads, i.e. , those who are faithless and who cavil at it.But those who do not follow this view of Mine, namely, that the self has Me for Its support, is subservient to Me and is actuated by Me only, i.e., those who do not perform all acts contemplating in this way as also those who have no faith in the meaning of the Sastras and calumniatethem - know them to be extremely deluded and devoid of reasoning and knowledge and consequently completely lost. For, the function of the mind is the determination of the real nature of things, and in its absence, those mentioned above are devoid of reason, and therefore apostates in knowledge and extremely deluded in all ways.  
101 एवं प्रकृतिसंसर्गिणः तद्गुणोद्रेककृतं कर्तृत्वं तच्च परमपुरुषायत्तम् इति अनुसन्धाय कर्मयोगयोग्येन ज्ञानयोगयोग्येन च कर्मयोगस्य सुशकत्वाद् अप्रमादत्वाद् अन्तर्गतात्मज्ञानतयानिरपेक्षत्वाद् इतरस्य दुःशकत्वात् सप्रमादत्वात् शरीरधारणाद्यर्थतया कर्मापेक्षत्वात् कर्मयोग एव कर्तव्यः । व्यपदेश्यस्य तु विशेषतः स एव कर्तव्य इति च उक्तम् । अतः परम् अध्यायशेषेण ज्ञानयोगस्य दुःशकतया सप्रमादता उच्यते -प्रकृतिविविक्तम् ईदृशम् आत्मस्वरूपम्, तदेव सर्वदा अनुसन्धेयम्, इति च शास्त्राणि प्रतिपादयन्ति; इति ज्ञानवान् अपि स्वस्याः प्रकृतेः प्राचीनवासनया सदृशं प्राकृतविषयेषु एव चेष्टते; कुतः? प्रकृतिं यान्ति भूतानि अचित्संसृष्टा जन्तवः अनादिकालप्रवृत्तवासनाम् एव यान्ति, तानि वासनानुयायीनि भूतानि शास्त्रकृतो निग्रहः किं करिष्यति । 33 । For one united with the Prakrti (body), the sense of agency results from the preponderance of the Gunas of Prakrti. But this agency really rests with the Supreme Person. Contemplating thus, Karma Yoga alone should be practised by both - those who are competent for KarmaYoga only and those who are competent for Jnana Yoga. The implied superiority of Karma Yoga has the following justifications; it is easy to perform, free from liability to lapse, and independent of anything else; it comprises the knowledge of the self also within its scope. On the other hand Jnana Yoga is difficult to practise, is not free from the liability to lapse. leaves one dependent on actions for the sustenance of the body etc. And for a distinguished person, this (i.e., Karma Yoga) is especially what ought to be practised.Next, till the end of this chapter. it is explained how Jnana Yoga, being difficult, is liable to lead to lapses. Such and such is the nature of the self; which is different from the Prakrti - this has to be always contemplated upon: thus declare the Sastras. Even a person who knows this, acts in relation to material objects only according to his own nature, i.e., guided by his old subtle impressions. How is this? `All beings follow their nature.' Beings in conjunction with non-conscient matter, all follow only subtle impressions which have continued to come from time immemorial.What can the control enjoined by Sastras, do to these beings who follow their subtle impressions?  
102 प्रकृत्यनुयायित्वप्रकारम् आह -श्रोत्रादिज्ञानेन्द्रियस्य अर्थे शब्दादौ वागादिकर्मेन्द्रियस्य च अर्थे वचनादौ प्राचीनवासनाजनित-तदनुबुभूषारूपो रागः अवर्जनीयो व्यवस्थितः; तदनुभवे प्रतिहते च अवर्जनीयो द्वेषो व्यवस्थितः; तौ एव ज्ञानयोगाय यतमानं नियमितसर्वेन्द्रियं स्ववशे कृत्वा प्रसह्य स्वकार्येषु नियोजयतः ।  ततः च अयम् आत्मस्वरूपानुभवविमुखो विनष्टो भवति । तयोः न वशम् आगच्छेत् - ज्ञानयोगारम्भेण रागद्वेषवशम् आगम्य न विनश्येत् । तौ रागद्वेषौ हि अस्य परिपन्थिनौ दुर्जयौ शत्रू आत्मज्ञानाभ्यासं वारयतः । 34 । Sri Krshna expounds the way by which individuals are overpowered to follow their respective natures:An unavoidable attraction has been fixed for organs of sense like ear towards the objects like sound, and for organs of action like that of tongue towards their objects like tasty food. This longing is in the form of desire to experience these objects, which is caused by old subtleimpressions. When their experience is thwarted, an unavoidable aversion is experienced. Thus, these two, attachment and aversion, bring under their control one who aspires to follow Jnana Yoga, and forcibly engage him in actions appropriate to them, in spite of his having establishedsome sort of control over the senses.Such an aspirant fails to get the experience of the self, and therefore becomes completely lost. So no one practising Jnana Yoga should come under the sway of attachment and aversion, which are ruinous. These two attachment and aversion, are indeed his unconquerable foes that deter him from the practice of Jnana Yoga.  
103 अतः सुशकतया स्वधर्मभूतः कर्मयोगो विगुणः अपि अप्रमादगर्भः प्रकृतिसंसृष्टस्य दुःशकतया परधर्मभूतात् ज्ञानयोगात् सगुणाद् अपि किञ्चित्कालम् अनुष्ठितात् सप्रमादात् श्रेयान् ।स्वेन एव उपादातुं योग्यतया स्वधर्मभूते कर्मयोगे वर्तमानस्य एकस्मिन् जन्मनि अप्राप्तफलतया निधनम् अपि श्रेयः, अनन्तरायहततया अनन्तरजन्मनि अपि अव्याकुलकर्मयोगारम्भसंभवात् । प्रकृतिसंसृष्टस्य स्वेन एव उपादातुम् अशक्यतया परधर्मभूतो ज्ञानयोगः प्रमादगर्भतया भयावहः । 35 । Therefore Karma Yoga is better than JnanaYoga. For, it forms one's own duty, since it is natural to one and easy to perform, and though defective, is free from liability to interruption and fall. Jnana Yoga, on the other hand, though performed well for some time, constitutes the duty of another, as it is difficult to practise for one conjoined with Prakrti. It is therefore liable to interruption. For a person who lives practising Karma Yoga - which is his duty because, he is qualified for it - even death without success in one birth does not matter. For in the next birth with the help of the experience already gained in the previous birth, it will be possible for him to perform Karma Yoga without any impediments. Jnana Yoga is fraught with fear because of the possibility of errors for anyone who is conjoined to Prakrti. It is another's duty, on account of it being not easily adoptable by him.  
104 अर्जुन उवाचअथ अयं ज्ञानयोगाय प्रवृत्तः पुरुषः स्वयं विषयान् अनुभवितुम् अनिच्छन् अपि केन प्रयुक्तो विषयानुभवरूपं पापं बलात् नियोजित इव चरति? । 36 । Arjuna said:Impelled by what does a man practising Jnana Yoga commit sin in the form of experiencing the objects of the senses, as if constrained by force,even against his own will not to experience the objects of the senses.  
105 श्री भगवानुवाचअस्य उद्भवाभिभवरूपेण वर्तमानगुणमयप्रकृतिसंसृष्टस्य प्रारब्धज्ञानयोगस्य रजोगुणसमुद्भवः प्राचीनवासनाजनितः शब्दादिविषयः अयं कामो महाशनः शत्रुः, सर्वविषयेषु एनम् आकर्षति ।एष एव प्रतिहतगतिः प्रतिहननहेतुभूतचेतनान् प्रति क्रोधरूपेण परिणतो महापाप्मा परहिंसादिषु प्रवर्तयति; एनम् रजोगुणसमुद्भवं सहजं ज्ञानयोगविरोधिनं वैरिणं विद्धि । 37 । The Lord said:The highly ravenous desire is born of the Guna Rajas originating from old subtle impressions. It has for its objects sound and other sense contacts. It is a foe to him who is practising Jnana Yoga, as he is joined with Prakrti constituted of the Gunas which rise and subside periodically.It attracts him towards the objects of the senses. It is this desire alone which, when hampered, develops into anger towards those persons who are the cause of such hindrance. It is a powerful cause of sin. It incites the aspirant to do harm to others. Know this, which is born of the Guna called Rajas, as the natural enemy of Jnana Yogins.  
106 यथा धूमेन वह्निः आव्रियते, यथा च आदर्शो मलेन, यथा च उल्बेन आवृतो गर्भः तथा तेन कामेन इदं जन्तुजातम् आवृतम् । 38 । As a fire is enveloped by smoke, as a mirror by dust and as an embryo by the membrane, so are the embodied beings covered by this desire.  
107 आवरणप्रकारम् आह -अस्य जन्तोः ज्ञानिनो ज्ञानस्वभावस्य आत्मविषयं ज्ञानम् एतेन कामकारेण विषयव्यामोहजननेन नित्यवैरिणा आवृतं दुष्पूरेण पूर्त्यनर्हविषयेण अनलेन च पर्याप्तिरहितेन । 39 । Sri Krshna teaches the mode of this envelopment:The knowledge, having the self for its subject, of this embodied person (the Jiva) whose nature is knowledge, is enveloped by this constant enemy in the shape of desire, which brings about attachment for sense-objects. This desire is difficult to satisfy, i.e., has for its object things unworthy of attainment and is insatiable, i.e., never attainssatisfaction.  
108 कैः उपकरणैः अयं काम आत्मानम् अधितिष्ठति इति अत्र आह -अधितिष्ठति एभिः अयं कामः आत्मानम् इति इन्द्रियाणि मनो बुद्धिः अस्य अधिष्ठानम् । एतैः इन्द्रियमनोबुद्धिभिः कामाधिष्ठानभूतैः विषयप्रवणैः देहिनं प्रकृतिसंसृष्टं ज्ञानम् आवृत्य विमोहयति - विविधंमोहयति आत्मज्ञानविमुखं विषयानुभवपरं करोति इत्यर्थः । 40 । Now listen to what constitutes the instruments with which desire subdues the self. Sri Krshna goes on to expound this:The senses, the mind and the intellect are the instruments of desire in so far as it overpowers the self through them. By means of these, viz., the senses, the mind and the intellect, which have been reduced to the position of servants through attachment to sense objects, desire deludesthe embodied soul caught up in Prakrti by covering up Its knowledge. Here 'deluding' means making the self a victim of manifold illusions, by turning It away from the knowledge of Its true nature, and making It indulge in sensuous experiences.  
109 यस्मात् सर्वेन्द्रियव्यापारोपरतिरूपे ज्ञानयोगे प्रवृत्तस्य अयं कामरूपः शत्रुः विषयाभिमुख्यकरणेन आत्मनि वैमुख्यं करोति; तस्मात् प्रकृतिसंसृष्टतया इन्द्रियव्यापारप्रवणः त्वम् आदौ मोक्षोपायारम्भसमये एव इन्द्रियव्यापाररूपे कर्मयोगे इन्द्रियाणि नियम्य एनं ज्ञानविज्ञाननाशनम्आत्मस्वरूपविषयस्य ज्ञानस्य तद्विवेकविषयस्य च नाशनं पाप्मानं कामरूपं वैरिणं प्रजहि नाशय । 41 । For whatever reason a person engaged in Jnana Yoga, which is of the nature of abandoning the activities of all the senses, should control this enemy in the shape of desire which turns him away from the self through creating infatuation for objects of the senses - for the same reason, you, who are yoked to the activities of the senses by reason ofbeing in conjunction with the Prakrti, should, in the beginning itself, i.e., at the very beginning of the practice of the means for release, control the senses by the practice of Karma Yoga, which provides for the regulation of the working of the senses. And then you must destroy, i.e., slay this sinful enemy, which is in the shape of desire and which destroys knowledge and discrimination, i.e., knowledge relating to the nature of the self and of the discriminative power, which is the means to gain this knowledge.  
110 ज्ञानविरोधिषु प्रधानम् आह -ज्ञानविरोधे प्रधानानि इन्द्रियाणि आहुः, यत इन्द्रियेषु विषयव्यापृतेषु आत्मनि ज्ञानं न प्रवर्तते,इन्द्रियेभ्यः परं मनः, इन्द्रियेषु उपरतेषु अपि मनसि विषयप्रवणे आत्मज्ञानं न संभवति । मनसःतु परा बुद्धिः, मनसि विषयान्तरविमुखे अपि विपरीताध्यवसायप्रवृत्तायां बुद्धौ न आत्मज्ञानं प्रवर्तते । सर्वेषु बुद्धिपर्यन्तेषु उपरतेषु अपि इच्छापर्यायः कामो रजः समुद्भवो वर्तते चेत्, स एवएतानि इन्द्रियादीनि अपि स्वविषयेषु वर्तयित्वा आत्मज्ञानं निरुणद्धि, तदिदम् उच्यते - यो बुद्धेः परतः तु सः, इति, बुद्धेः अपि यः परः स काम इत्यर्थः । 42 । Sri Krshna speaks of that which is most important among the adversaries:The senses are called the important obstacles of knowledge, because when the senses keep operating on their objects, the knowledge of the self cannot arise. 'The mind is higher than the senses': even if the senses are withdrawn, if the Manas (mind) ruminates over sense objects, knowledge of the self cannot be had. 'The intellect (Buddhi) is greaterthan the mind', i.e ., even if the mind is indifferent to sense-objects, a perverted decision by the intellect can obstruct the dawn of the knowledge of the self. But  even if all of them up to the intellect are quietened from their activity, still when desire, identified with will, originating from Rajas, is operating, it by itself obstructs the knowledge of the self by inducing the senses etc., to operate in their fields. Thus it is said here: 'But what is greater than intellect is that.' What is greater than the intellect - is desire. Such is the sense of the last sentence here.  
111 एवं बुद्धेः अपि परं कामं ज्ञानविरोधिनं वैरिणं बुद्ध्वा आत्मानं मनः आत्मना बुद्ध्या कर्मयोगे अवस्थाप्य एनं कामरूपं दुरासदं शत्रुं जहि नाशय इति । 43 । Thus, understanding desire, which is higher than even the intellect, to be the foe antagonistic to Jnana Yoga, and establishing the mind by means of the intellect in KarmaYoga, slay, i.e., destroy this foe, in the shape of desire which is difficult to overcome:  
112 चतुर्थोऽध्यायःतृतीये अध्याये प्रकृतिसंसृष्टस्य मुमुक्षोः सहसा ज्ञानयोगे अनधिकारात् कर्मयोग एव कार्यः।ज्ञानयोगाधिकारिणः अपि अकर्तृत्वामुसन्धानपूर्वकं कर्मयोग एव श्रेयान् इति सहेतुकम् उक्तम्।विशिष्टतया व्यपदेश्यस्य तु विशेषतः कर्मयोग एव कार्य इति च उक्तम्।चतुर्थे तु इदानीम् अस्य एव कर्मयोगस्य निखिलजगदुद्धरणाय मन्वन्तरादौ एव उपदिष्टतयाकर्तव्यतां द्रढयित्वा अन्तर्गतज्ञानतया अस्य एव ज्ञानयोगाकारतां प्रदर्श्य, कर्मयोगस्वरूपं तद्भेदाः कर्मयोगे ज्ञानांशस्य एव प्राधान्यं च उच्यते। प्रसङ्गाच्च भगवदवतारयाथात्म्यम् उच्यते -श्री भगवानुवाच Renunciation of Action in KnowledgeIn the third chapter, it is said with reasons that, with reference to an aspirant in whom the bodily impulses are strong, he should practise Karma Yoga alone. He is not qualified for Jnana Yoga all at once; and even if he is qualified for Jnana Yoga, the practice of Karma Yoga alone,preceded by comtemplation on the self as not an agent of any action, is better. It has also been shown that in respect of a person who is distinguished for his virtues (and is expected to set an example for others), Karma Yoga alone must be practised by him.  
