11.1   अर्जुन उवाच मदनुग्रहाय परमं गुह्यमध्यात्मसञ्ज्ञितम् । यत्त्वयोक्तं वचस्तेन मोहोऽयं विगतो मम ।।    Arjuna said; To show favor to me, You have told me that most profound mysteryconcerning the self; by that, this delusion of mine is dispelled. 
 11.2   भवाप्ययौ हि भूतानां श्रुतौ विस्तरशो मया । त्वत्तः कमलपत्राक्ष माहात्म्यमपि चाव्ययम् ।।    The origination and dissolution of all beings, O Krishna,(as issuing from you) have been heard verily by me at length as also Yourimmutable greatness. 
 11.3   एवमेतद्यथात्थ त्वमात्मानम् परमेश्वर । द्रष्टुमिच्छामि ते रूपमैश्वरं पुरुषोत्तम ।।    O Supreme Lord, how You described Yourself, even so are You. I wish to see Your Lordly form, O Supreme Person. 
 11.4   मन्यसे यदि तच्छक्यं मया द्रष्टुमिति प्रभो । योगेश्वर ततो मे त्वं दर्शयात्मानमव्ययम् ।।    If you think, O Lord, that it can be seen by me, then O Lord of Yoga, reveal Yourself to me completely. 
 11.5   श्रीभगवानुवाच पश्य मे पार्थ रूपाणि शतशोऽथ सहस्रशः । नानाविधानि दिव्यानि नानावर्णाकृतीनि च ।।    The lord said; Behold My forms, O Arjuna, hundreds upon thousands, manifold, divinevaried in hue and shape. 
 11.6   पश्यादित्यान्वसून्रुद्रानश्विनौ मरुतस्तथा । बहून्यदृष्टपूर्वाणि पश्याश्चर्याणि भारत ।।    Behold the Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the two Asvins and the Maruts. Behold, O Arjuna, many marvels never seen before. 
 11.7   इहैकस्थं जगत्कृत्स्नं पश्याद्य सचराचरम् । मम देहे गुडाकेश यच्चान्यद्द्रष्टुमिच्छसि ।।    Behold here, O Arjuna, the whole universe with its mobile and immobile things centered in My body and whatever else you desireto see. 
 11.8   न तु मां शक्यसे द्रष्टुमनेनैव स्वचक्षुषा । दिव्यं ददामि ते चक्षुः पश्य मे योगमैश्वरम् ।।    But you will not be able to see Me with your own eye. I give you a divine eye. Behold My Lordly Yoga! 
 11.9   सञ्जय उवाच एवमुक्त्वा ततो राजन् महायोगेश्वरो हरिः । दर्शयामास पार्थाय परमं रूपमैश्वरम् ।।    Sanjaya said; Having spoken, O King, Sri Krishna, the great Lord of Yoga, thenrevealed to Arjuna the Supreme Lordly Form. 
 11.10   अनेकवक्त्रनयनमनेकाद्भुतदर्शनम् । अनेकदिव्याभरणं दिव्यानेकोद्यतायुधम् ।।    With innumerable mouths and eyes, many marvelous aspects, many divine ornaments and many divine weapons. 
 11.11   दिव्यमाल्याम्बरधरं दिव्यगन्धानुलेपनम् । सर्वाश्चर्यमयं देवमनन्तं विश्वतोमुखम् ।।    Wearing celestial garlands and raiments, anointed with divine perfumes, full of all wonders, resplendent, boundless and facingall directions. 
 11.12   दिवि सूर्यसहस्रस्य भवेद्युगपदुत्थिता । यदि भाः सदृशी सा स्याद्भासस्तस्य महात्मनः ।।    If a  thousand suns were to rise at once in the sky, the resulting splendour may be like the splendour of that mighty One. 
 11.13   तत्रैकस्थं जगत्कृत्स्नं प्रविभक्तमनेकधा । अपश्यद्देवदेवस्य शरीरे पाण्डवस्तदा ।।    There (in that form) Arjuna beheld the whole universe, with its manifold divisions gathered together in one single spot within thebody of the God of gods. 
 11.14   ततः स विस्मयाविष्टो हृष्टरोमा धनञ्जयः । प्रणम्य शिरसा देवं कृताञ्जलिरभाषत ।।    Then he , Arjuna, overcome with amazement, his hairs standing erect, bowed his head to the Lord, and with folded hands spoke. 
 11.15   अर्जुन उवाच पश्यामि देवांस्तव देव देहे सर्वांस्तथा भूतविशेषसङ्घान् । ब्रह्माणामीशं कमलासनस्थम् ऋषींश्च सर्वानुरगांश्च दिव्यान् ।।    Arjuna said: I behold, O Lord, in Your body all the gods and all the diversehosts of beings, Brahma, Shiva (Isa) who is in Brahma, the seers and the lustrous snakes. 
 11.16   अनेकबाहूदरवक्त्रनेत्रम् पश्यामि त्वां सर्वतोऽनन्तरूपम् । नान्तं न मध्यं न पुनस्तवादिम् पश्यामि विश्वेश्वर विश्वरूप ।।    With manifold arms, stomachs, mouths and eyes, I behold Your infinite form of all sides. I see no end, no middle nor thebeginning too of You, O Lord of the universe, O You of Universal form. 
 11.17   किरीटिनं गदिनं चक्रिणं च तेजोराशिं सर्वतोदीप्तिमन्तम् । पश्यामि त्वां दुर्निरीक्ष्यं समन्तात् दीप्तानलार्कद्युतिमप्रमेयम् ।।    I behold You as a mass of light shining everywhere, with diadem, mace and discus, hard to behold, blazing like a burning fire andthe sun, and immeasurable. 
 11.18   त्वमक्षरं परमं वेदितव्यम् त्वमस्य विश्वस्य परं निधानम् । त्वमव्ययः शाश्वतधर्मगोप्ता सनातनस्त्वं पुरुषो मतो मे ।।    You are the Imperishable, Supreme One to be realized. You are the Supreme Substratum of this universe. You are immutable, theguardian of the eternal law, I know You are the Supreme person who is everlasting. 
 11.19   अनादिमध्यान्तमनन्तवीर्यम् अनन्तबाहुं शशिसूर्यनेत्रम् । पश्यामि त्वां दीप्तहुताशवक्त्रम् स्वतेजसा विश्वमिदं तपन्तम् ।।    I behold You as without beginning, middle and end. Your might is infinite. You are endowed with the endless number of arms. The sunand moon are Your eyes. Your mouth is emitting burning fire. With Your own radiance You are warming the whole universe. 
 11.20   द्यावापृथिव्योरिदमन्तरं हि व्याप्तं त्वयैकेन दिशश्च सर्वाः । दृष्ट्वाद्भुतं रूपमुग्रं तवेदम् लोकत्रयं प्रव्यथितं महात्मन् ।।    You alone have pervaded the interspace between heaven and earth, and all the quarters. Beholding Your marvelous and terrible form,O mahatman, the three worlds are greatly overwhelmed with fear. 
 11.21   अमी हि त्वा सुरसङ्घा विशन्ति केचिद्भीताः प्राञ्जलयो गृणन्ति । स्वस्तीत्युक्त्वा महर्षिसिद्धसङ्घाः स्तुवन्ति त्वां स्तुतिभिः पुष्कलाभिः ।।    Verily into You the hosts of Devas enter. Some in fear extol You with clasped hands. Crying 'Hail' the bands of great seers andSiddhas prasie You with meaningful hymns. 
 11.22   रुद्रादित्या वसवो ये च साध्याः विश्वेऽश्विनौ मरुतश्चोष्मपाश्च । गन्धर्वयक्षासुरसिद्धसङ्घाः वीक्षन्ते त्वां विस्मिताश्चैव सर्वे ।।    The Rudras, the Aditya, the Vasus, the Sandhyas, the Visvas, the Asvins, the Maruts and the manes , and the hosts of Gandhrava,Yaksas, Asuras, and Siddhas- all gaze upon You in amazement. 
 11.23   रूपं महत्ते बहुवक्त्रनेत्रम् महाबाहो बहुबाहूरुपादम् । बहूदरं बहुदंष्ट्राकरालम् दृष्ट्वा लोकाः प्रव्यथितास्तथाहम् ।।    Beholding Your great form with many mouths and eyes with many arms, thighs, and feet, with many stomachs and terrible with many teeth,the worlds tremble, and I too quake, O mighty-armed. 
 11.24   नभःस्पृशं दीप्तमनेकवर्णम् व्यात्ताननं दीप्तविशालनेत्रम् । दृष्ट्वा हि त्वां प्रव्यथितान्तरात्मा धृतिं न विन्दामि शमं च विष्णो ।।    When I behold You touching the Supreme heaven, shining, multicolored with yawning mouths and large resplendent eyes, my inner beingtrembles in fear. I am unable to find support or peace, O Vishnu. 
 11.25   दंष्ट्राकरालानि च ते मुखानि दृष्ट्वैव कालानलसन्निभानि । दिशो न जाने न लभे च शर्म प्रसीद देवेश जगन्निवास ।।    Viewing Your mouths, presenting awe-generating fangs and looking like the consuming fire of final destruction, I  know not the quartersof the globe nor do I find repose. Be gracious, O Lord of the Devas! O Abode of the universe. 
 11.26   अमी च त्वां धृतराष्ट्रस्य पुत्राः सर्वे सहैवावनिपालसङ्घैः । भीष्मो द्रोणः सूतपुत्रस्तथासौ सहास्मदीयैरपि योधमुख्यैः ।।    All these sons of Dhratarastra together with the hosts of monarchs , Bishma, Drona and Karna along with the leading warriors of ourside. 
 11.27   वक्त्राणि ते त्वरमाणा विशन्ति दंष्ट्राकरालानि भयानकानि । केचिद्विलग्ना दशनान्तरेषु सन्दृश्यन्ते चूर्णितैरुत्तमाङ्गैः ।।    Hasten to enter Your fearful mouths with terrible fangs. Some, caught between the teeth are seen with their heads crushed to powder. 
 11.28   यथा नदीनां बहवोऽम्बुवेगाः समुद्रमेवाभिमुखा द्रवन्ति । तथा तवामी नरलोकवीराः विशन्ति वक्त्राण्यभिविज्वलन्ति ।।    As many torrents of rivers flow towards the ocean, so do these heroes of the world of men enter Your flaming mouths. 
 11.29   यथा प्रदीप्तं ज्वलनं पतङ्गाः विशन्ति नाशाय समृद्धवेगाः । तथैव नाशाय विशन्ति लोकाः तवापि वक्त्राणि समृद्धवेगाः ।।    As mouths rush swiftly into a blazing fire to their destruction, so do these men swiftly rush into Your mouths to meet their destruction. 
 11.30   लेलिह्यसे ग्रसमानः समन्तात् लोकान्समग्रान्वदनैर्ज्वलद्भिः । तेजोभिरापूर्य जगत्समग्रम् भासस्तवोग्राः प्रतपन्ति विष्णो ।।    Devouring all the worlds on every side with your flaming mouths, You lick them up. Your fiery rays, filling the whole universe with theirradiance, scorch it, O Vishnu. 
 11.31   आख्याहि मे को भवानुग्ररूपो नमोस्तु ते देववर प्रसीद । विज्ञातुमिच्छामि भवन्तमाद्यम् न हि प्रजानामि तव प्रवृत्तिम् ।।    Tell me who You are with this terrible form? Salutation to You, O Supreme God. Be gracious. I desire to know You, the Primal One.I do not know Your activity. 
 11.32   श्रीभगवानुवाच कालोऽस्मि लोकक्षयकृत्प्रवृद्धो लोकान्समाहर्तुमिह प्रवृत्तः । ऋतेऽपि त्वां न भविष्यन्ति सर्वे येऽवस्थिताः प्रत्यनीकेषु योधाः ।।    The Lord said: I am the world-destroying Time. Manifesting Myself fully, I havebegun to destroy the worlds here. Even without You, none of the warriors arrayed in the hostile ranks shall survive. 
 11.33   तस्मात्त्वमुत्तिष्ठ यशो लभस्व जित्वा शत्रून्भुङ्क्ष्व राज्यं समृद्धम् । मयैवैते निहताः पूर्वमेव निमित्तमात्रं भव सव्यसाचिन् ।।    Therefore arise, win glory. Conquering your foes, enjoy a prosperous kingdom. By me they have been slain already. You be merely aninstrument, O Arjuna, you great Bowman! 
 11.34   द्रोणं च भीष्मं च जयद्रथं च कर्णं तथान्यानपि योधवीरान् । मया हतांस्त्वं जहि मा व्यथिष्ठाः युध्यस्व जेतासि रणे सपत्नान् ।।    Slay Drona, Bhishma, Jayadratha, Karna as well as other mighty warriors, who have been doomed by Me. Do not feel distressed.Fight. You shall conquer your rivals in the battle. 
 11.35   सञ्जय उवाच एतच्छ्रुत्वा वचनं केशवस्य कृताञ्जलिर्वेपमानः किरीटी । नमस्कृत्वा भूय एवाह कृष्णम् सगद्गदम् भीतभीतः प्रणम्य ।।    Sanjaya said: Having heard this speech of Krishna, Arjuna did Him obeisance; andtrembling with awe, he bowed down again, and with folded palms and trembling, he spoke to Krishna in a choked voice. 
 11.36   अर्जुन उवाच स्थाने हृषीकेश तव प्रकीर्त्या जगत्प्रहृष्यत्यनुरज्यते च । रक्षांसि भीतानि दिशोद्रवन्ति सर्वे नमस्यन्ति च सिद्धसङ्घाः ।।    Arjuna said: Rightly it is, O Krishna, that Your praise should move the world tojoy and love. The Raksasas flee in fear on all sides, and all the hosts of Siddhas bow down to You. 
 11.37   कस्माच्च ते न नमेरन् महात्मन् गरीयसे ब्रह्मणोऽप्यादिकर्त्रे । अनन्त देवेश जगन्निवास त्वमक्षरं सदसत्तत्परं यत् ।।    And why should they not, O Mahatman, bow down to You who are great, being the first Creator, even of Brahma? O Infinite, Lord of gods,O You who have the universe for Your abode! You are the imperishable individual self, the existent and the non-existent, 
 11.38   त्वमादिदेवः पुरुषः पुराणः त्वमस्य विश्वस्य परं निधानम् । वेत्तासि वेद्यं च परं च धाम त्वया ततं विश्वमनन्तरूप ।।    You are the Primal God and the Ancient Person. You are the Supreme resting place of the universe. You are the knower and that whichmust be known, and the Supreme abode. By You, O infinite of form, is this universe pervaded. 
 11.39   वायुर्यमोऽग्निर्वरुणः शशाङ्कः प्रजापतिस्त्वं प्रपितामहश्च । नमो नमस्तेऽस्तु सहस्रकृत्वः पुनश्च भूयोऽपि नमो नमस्ते ।।    You are Vayu, Yama, Agni, Varuna, Sasanka, Prajapati and the great- grandsire..... Hail, Hail unto You, a thousand times! Hail unto You'again and yet again! 
 11.40   नमः पुरस्तादथ पृष्ठतस्ते नमोऽस्तु ते सर्वत एव सर्व । अनन्तवीर्यामितविक्रमस्त्वम् सर्वं समाप्नोषि ततोऽसि सर्वः ।।    Salutation to you from before and behind! Salutation to You from all sides, O All!.. O You of infinite prowess and heroic actionwhich are measureless! You pervade all beings and therefore are all. 
 11.41   सखेति मत्वा प्रसभं यदुक्तम् हे कृष्ण हे यादव हे सखेति । अजानता महिमानं तवेदम् मया प्रमादात्प्रणयेन वापि ।।    Unaware of this majesty of Yours, and either from negligence or love, or considering You to be a friend, whatever I have rudely said asO Krishna, O Yadava, O Comrade. 
 11.42   यच्चावहासार्थमसत्कृतोऽसि विहारशय्यासनभोजनेषु । एकोऽथवाप्यच्युत तत्समक्षम् तत्क्षामये त्वामहमप्रमेयम् ।।    And whatever disrespect has been shown to you in jest, while playing resting, while sitting or eating, while alone or in the sight ofothers, O Acyuta- I implore You for forgiveness, You who are incomprehensible. 
 11.43   पितासि लोकस्य चराचरस्य त्वमस्य पूज्यश्च गुरुर्गरीयान् । न त्वत्समोऽस्त्यभ्यधिकः कुतोऽन्यो लोकत्रयेऽप्यप्रतिमप्रभाव ।।    You are the father of the world, of all that moves and that does not move. You are its teacher and the one most worthy of reverence.There is none equal to You. How then could there be in the three worlds another greater than You, O being of matchless gre 
 11.44   तस्मात्प्रणम्य प्रणिधाय कायम् प्रसादये त्वामहमीशमीड्यम् । पितेव पुत्रस्य सखेव सख्युः प्रियः प्रियायार्हसि देव सोढुम् ।।    Therefore, bowing down, prostrating the body, I implore Your mercy O adorable Lord. As a father bears his son or a friend with hisfriend, it is meet, O lord, that you, who are dear to me, should bear with me who am dear to You. 
 11.45   अदृष्टपूर्वं हृषितोऽस्मि दृष्ट्वा भयेन च प्रव्यथितम् मनो मे । तदेव मे दर्शय देव रूपम् प्रसीद देवेश जगन्निवास ।।    Seeing what was never seen before, I am delighted. But my mind is also agog with awe. Show me, O Lord! Your other form. O Lord of thegods! Be gracious, O Abode of the universe! 
 11.46   किरीटिनं गदिनं चक्रहस्तम् इच्छामि त्वां द्रष्टुमहं तथैव । तेनैव रूपेण चतुर्भुजेन सहस्रबाहो भव विश्वमूर्ते ।।    I wish to see You as before, with crown and with mace and discus in hand. Assume again that four-armed shape, O thou the thousand-armedof Universal Form! 
 11.47   श्रीभगवानुवाच मया प्रसन्नेन तवार्जुनेदम् रूपं परं दर्शितमात्मयोगात् । तेजोमयं विश्वमनन्तमाद्यम् यन्मे त्वदन्येन न दृष्टपूर्वम् ।।    The Lord said: By My grace, O Arjuna, this Supreme Form, luminous, universal,infinite, primal, never seen before by anyone but you, has been revealed to you through My own free will. 
 11.48   न वेदयज्ञाध्ययनैर्न दानैः न च क्रियाभिर्न तपोभिरुग्रैः । एवंरूपः शक्य अहं नृलोके द्रष्टुं त्वदन्येन कुरुप्रवीर ।।    either through the study of the Vedas, nor by sacrifices, nor by strict austerities can I be realized in a form like this in theworld of men by any one else but you, O Arjuna. 
 11.49   मा ते व्यथा मा च विमूढभावो दृष्ट्वा रूपं घोरमीदृङ्ममेदम् । व्यपेतभीः प्रीतमनाः पुनस्त्वम् तदेव मे रूपमिदम् प्रपश्य ।।    You need not fear any more, nor be perplexed, looking on this awesome form of Mine. Free from fear and with a gladdened heart, behold againthat other form of Mine. 
 11.50   सञ्जय उवाच इत्यर्जुनं वासुदेवस्तथोक्त्वा स्वकं रूपं दर्शयामास भूयः । आश्वासयामास च भीतमेनम् भूत्वा पुनः सौम्यवपुर्महात्मा ।।    Sanjaya said: Having spoken thus to Arjuna. Sri Krishna revealed to him once morehis own form. The mahatman assuming again a benign form, reassured him who had been struck with awe. 
 11.51   अर्जुन उवाच दृष्ट्वेदं मानुषं रूपं तव सौम्यं जनार्दन । इदानीमस्मि संवृत्तः सचेताः प्रकृतिं गतः ।।    Arjuna said; having beheld the human and pleasing form of Yours, O Krishna, Ihave now become composed in mind and I am restored to my normal nature. 
 11.52   श्रीभगवानुवाच सुदुर्दर्शमिदं रूपं दृष्टवानसि यन्मम । देवा अप्यस्य रूपस्य नित्यं दर्शनकाङ्क्षिणः ।।   It is very hard to behold this form of Mine which you have seen. Even the gods ever long to behold this form. 
 11.53   नाहं वेदैर्न तपसा न दानेन न चेज्यया । शक्य एवंविधो द्रष्टुं दृष्टवानसि मां यथा ।।    ot by the Vedas, nor by austerities, nor by gifts, nor by sacrifice, can I be seen in such a form as You have seen me. 
 11.54   भक्त्या त्वनन्यया शक्य अहमेवंविधोऽर्जुन । ज्ञातुं द्रष्टुं च तत्त्वेन प्रवेष्टुं च परन्तप ।।    But by single -minded devotion, O Arjuna, it is possible to truly know, to see and to enter into Me, who am of this form,O harasser of the foes. 
 11.55   मत्कर्मकृन्मत्परमो मद्भक्तः सङ्गवर्जितः । निर्वैरः सर्वभूतेषु यः स मामेति पाण्डव ।।    Whosoever works for Me, looks upon Me as the highest and is devoted to Me, free from attachment and without enmity towards anycreature, he comes to Me, O Arjuna. 
 11.0   ओंतत्सदिति श्रीमद्भगवद्गीतासु उपनिषत्सु ब्रह्मविद्यायां योगशास्त्रे श्रीकृष्णार्जुनसंवादे विश्वरूपदर्शनयोगो नाम एकादशोऽध्यायः     
