180 षष्ठोऽध्यायःउक्तः कर्मयोगः सपरिकरः, इदानीं ज्ञानकर्मयोगसाध्यात्मावलोकनरूपयोगाभ्यासविधिः उच्यते ।तत्र कर्मयोगस्य निरपेक्षयोगसाधनत्वं द्रढयितुं ज्ञानाकारः कर्मयोगो योगशिरस्कः अनूद्यते -श्रीभगवानुवाचकर्मफल स्वर्गादिकम् अनाश्रितः कार्यं कर्मानुष्ठानमेव कार्यं सर्वात्मनास्मत्सुहृद्भूतपरम-पुरुषाराधनरूपतया कर्मैव मम प्रयोजनं न तत्साध्यं किंचिद् इति यः कर्म करोति, स संन्यासी च ज्ञानयोगनिष्ठश्च योगी च कर्मयोगनिष्ठश्च । आत्मावलोकनरूपयोगसाधनभूतोभयनिष्ठ इत्यर्थः । न निरग्निर्नचाक्रियः - न चोदितयज्ञादिकर्मसु अप्रवृत्तः, केवलज्ञाननिष्ठः; तस्य हि ज्ञाननिष्ठा एव, कर्मयोगनिष्ठस्य तु उभयम् अस्ति इति अभिप्रायः । 1 । Communion through MeditationIn the last chapter Karma Yoga with all its ancillaries was taught. Now the requirements for the practice of Yoga or concentration consisting in the vision of the self, attainable both by Jnana Yoga and Karma Yoga, is taught. In the earlier chapter Karma Yoga as an autonomous means for the realisation of the self is established. Here Karma Yoga is again referred to for confirming this autonomous status by emphasising the involvement of Jnana in it as it is crowned with the vision of the self. He who, without depending on such fruits of works as heaven, etc., performs them, reflecting, 'The performance of works alone is my duty (Karya). Works themselves are my sole aim, because they are a form of worship, of the Supreme Person who is our Friend in every way. There is nothing other than Him to be gained by them' - such a person is a Sannyasin, i.e., one devoted to Jnana Yoga, and, also a Karma Yogin, i.e., one devoted to Karma Yoga. He is intent on both these, which is the means for attaining Yoga, which is of the nature of the vision of the self.' And not he who maintains no sacred fires and performs no works,' i.e., not he who is disinclined to perform the enjoined works such as sacrifices, etc., nor he who is devoted to mere knowledge. The meaning is that such a person is devoted only to knowledge, whereas a person, who is devoted to Karma Yoga has both knowledge and works.  
181 उक्तलक्षणे कर्मयोगे ज्ञानम् अपि अस्ति, इत्याह -यं ज्ञानयोग इति आत्मयाथात्म्यज्ञानम् इति प्राहुः तं कर्मयोगम् एव विद्धि । तद् उपपादयति,न ह्यसंन्यस्तसंकल्पो योगी भवति कश्चन इति ।आत्मयाथात्म्यानुसन्धानेन अनात्मनि प्रकृतौ आत्मसंकल्पः संन्यस्तः परित्यक्तो येन स संन्यस्तसंकल्पः, अनेवंभूतो यः सः असंन्यस्तसंकल्पः । न हि उक्तेषु कर्मयोगेषु अनेवंभूतः कश्चन कर्मयोगी भवति 'यस्य सर्वे समारम्भाः कामसंकल्पवर्जिताः ।' (गीता 4।19) इति हि उक्तम् । 2 । Now Sri Krshna teaches that there is an element of knowledge in the Karma Yoga as defined above.Know Karma Yoga only to be that which they call as Sannyasa i.e., as Jnana Yoga or knowledge of the real nature of the self. Sri Krshna substantiates this by the words, 'For no one whose delusive identificationof the body with the self is not abandoned, becomes a true Karma Yogin.' 'One whose delusion is abandoned is one by whom the delusion of identifying the self with Prakrti (body), which is in reality distinct fromthe self, is not rejected by the contemplation of the real nature of the self.One who is not of this kind is one whose delusion is not abandoned. One who is not of this kind cannot become a KarmaYogin of the type described here. It has already been said: 'He whose every undertaking is free from desire for fruits and delusive identification of the body with theself...' (4.19).  
182 कर्मयोग एव अप्रमादेन योगं साधयति इत्याह -योगम् आत्मावलोकनं प्राप्तुम् इच्छोः मुमुक्षोः कर्मयोग एव कारणम् उच्यते; तस्य एव योगारूढस्य प्रतिष्ठितयोगस्य एव शमः कर्मनिवृत्तिः कारणम् उत्यते । यावदात्मावलोकन-रूपमोक्षप्राप्तिः, तावत्कर्म कार्यम् इत्यर्थः । 3 । Sri Krsna now teaches that by Karma Yoga alone one succeeds in Yoga without the risk of fall.Karma Yoga is said to be the means for an aspirant for release who 'seeks to climb the heights of Yoga,' i.e., the vision of the self. For the same person, when he has climbed the 'heights of Yoga.' i.e., when he is established in Yoga - tranquility, i.e., freedom from actions is said tobe the means. A man should perform actions until he has attained release(Moksha) in the form of the vision of the self. Full release comes only with the fall of the body. The 'vision of the self' referred to here is called Moksha by courtesy.  
183 कदा प्रतिष्ठितयोगो भवति? इत्यत्र आह -यदा अयं योगी आत्मैकानुभवस्वभावतया इन्द्रियार्थेषु आत्मव्यतिरिक्तप्राकृतविषयेषुतत्सम्बन्धिषु कर्मसु च न अनुषज्जते न सङ्गम् अर्हति, तदा हि सर्वसंकल्पसंन्यासी योगारूढःइति उच्यते ।तस्माद् आरुरुक्षोः विषयानुभवार्हतया तदननुषङ्गाभ्यासरूपः कर्मयोग एव निष्पत्तिकारणम्,अतो विषयाननुषङ्गाभ्यासरूपं कर्मयोगम् एव आरुरुक्षुः कुर्यात् । 4 । When does one become established in Yoga ? Sri Krshna replies:When this Yogin, because of his natural disposition to the experience of the self, loses attachment, i.e., gets detached from sense-objects, i.e., things other than theself, and actions associated with them - then he has abandoned all desires and is said to have climbed the heights ofYoga. Therefore, for one wishing to climb to Yoga, but is still disposed to the experience of the sense-objects, KarmaYoga consisting of the practice ofdetachment to these objects, becomes the cause for success in Yoga. Therefore one who wishes to climb to Yoga must perform KarmaYoga consisting in the practice of detachment from sense-objects.  
184 तद् एव आह-आत्मना मनसा विषयाननुषक्तेन मनसा आत्मानम् उद्धरेत् । तद्विपरीतेन मनसा आत्मानं नअवसादयेत् । आत्मा एव मन एव हि आत्मनो बन्धुः, तद् एव आत्मनो रिपुः । 5 । Sri Krshna further elucidates the same:By the self (Atman), i.e., by the mind, which is unattached to sense-objects, one should raise the self. One should not allow the self to sink by a mind which is of the contrary kind. 'For the self alone,' i.e., the mind alone is the friend of the self; and it alone is the foe of the self. [The figure of speech here is of Samsara as the ocean in which the individual self is like an object with liability to sink. What causes its sinking is the lingering attachments of the mind to some objects, though in the discipline of JnanaYoga one may keep aloof from such objects. A mind with such attachments is the foe and without them, the friend].  
185 येन पुरुषेण स्वेन एव स्वमनो विषयेभ्यो जितं तन्मनः तस्य बन्धुः, अनात्मनः अजितमनसःस्वकीयम् एव मनः स्वस्य शत्रुवत् शत्रुत्वे वर्तेत, स्वनिःश्रेयसविपरीते इत्यर्थः । यथोक्तं भगवता पराशरेण अपि - 'मन एव मनुष्याणां कारणां बन्धमोक्षयोः । बन्धाय विषयासङ्गिमुक्त्यै निर्विषयं मनः ।।' (वि0 पु0 6।7।28) इति । 6 । A person whose mind is conquered by himself in relation to sense-objects, has that mind as his friend. In the case of one whose mindis not conquered in this way, his own mind, like an enemy, remains hostile. The meaning is that it acts against his attainment of supreme beatitude. It has been stated by Bhagavan Parasara also: 'The mind of man is the cause both of his bondage and his release. Its addiction tosense objects is the cause of his bondage; its separation from sense objects is the means of one's release' (V.P.,6.7.28).  
186 योगारम्भयोग्यावस्था उच्यते -शीतोष्णसुखदुःखेषु मानापमानयोः च जितात्मनः जितमनसः, विकाररहितमनसः; प्रशान्तस्यमनसि परमात्मा समाहितः सम्यगाहितः । स्वरूपेण अवस्थितः प्रत्यगात्मा अत्र परमात्मा इत्युच्यते, तस्य एव प्रकृतत्वात्, तस्य अपि पूर्वपूर्वावस्थापेक्षया परमात्मत्वात् । आत्मा परं समाहित इति वा सम्बन्धः । 7 । The proper condition for the beginning of Yoga is now taught:Of him whose self is conquered, i.e., whose mind is conquered, whose mind is free from fluctuations and who is very calm, 'the great self' becomes well secured, i.e., exceedingly well secured in connection with heat and cold, pleasure and pain, and honour and dishonour. Here the individual self (Pratyagatman) is called 'the great self (Paramatman), as the context justifies this only. It can also be called 'great', because it is at a higher stage relatively to previous successive stages. Or the word may be construed as follows: The self is secured greatly - Atmaparam samahitah. [In any case it should not be taken as the Supreme Being]  
187 ज्ञानविज्ञानतृप्तात्मा आत्मस्वरूपविषयेण ज्ञानेन तस्य च प्रकृतिविसजातीयाकारविषयेण विज्ञानेन च तृप्तमनाः, कूटस्थः - देवाद्यवस्थासु अनुवर्तमानः सर्वसाधारणज्ञानैकाकारात्मनि स्थितः, तत्र एव विजितेन्द्रियः, समलोष्टाश्मकाञ्चनः - प्रकृतिविविक्तस्वरूपनिष्ठतया प्राकृतवस्तुविशेषेषु भोग्यत्वाभावात् लोष्टाश्मकाञ्चनेषु समप्रयोजनो यः कर्मयोगी स युक्त इति उत्यते - आत्मावलोकनरूपयोगाभ्यासार्ह उच्यते । 8 । That Karma Yogin whose mind is content with the knowledge of the self and the knowledge of the difference, i.e., whose mind is content with the knowledge concerning the real nature of the self as well as with the knowledge of the difference of Its nature from Prakrti; 'who is established in the self' (Kutasthah), i.e., who remains as the self which is of the uniform nature of knowledge in all stages of evolution as men, gods etc., whose senses are therefore subdued; and to whom 'earth, stoneand gold are of equal value', because of his lack of interest in any material objects of enjoyment on account of his intense earnestness to know the real nature of the self as different from Prakrti - he, that Karma Yogi, is called integrated i.e., fit for the practice of Yoga which is of the nature of the vision of the self.  
188 तथा च -वयोविशेषानङ्गीकारेण स्वाहितैषिणः सुहृदः, सवयसो हितैषिणो मित्राणि, अरयो निमित्ततःअनर्थेच्छवः, उभयहेत्वभावाद् उभयरहिता उदासीनाः, जन्मत एव उभयरहिता मध्यस्थाः, जन्मत एव अनिष्टेच्छवो द्वेष्याः, जन्मत एव हितैषिणो बन्धवः, साधवो धर्मशीलाः, पापाः पापशीलाः, आत्मैकप्रयोजनतया सुहृन्मित्रादिभिः प्रयोजनाभावाद् विरोधाभावाच्च तेषु समबुद्धिः, योगाभ्यासार्हत्वे विशिष्यते । 9 । And also -Well-wishers' (Suhrt) are those who wish one well, regardless of differences in age. 'Friends' (Mitra) are well-wishers of equal age. 'Foes' (Ari) are those who wish ill to one because of some particular cause. 'The indifferent' (Udasina) are those devoid of both friendship andhostility because of the absence of causes for both; 'neutrals' (Madhyastha) are those who are by their very nature incapable of both friendship and hostility. 'The hateful' are those who wish ill to one even from birth. 'Relations' are those who bear goodwill from birth. 'The good'are those devoted to virtue. 'The sinful' are those given to sin. Because ofthe self being the only end of Yoga, and because of there being no gain and no opposition from well-wishers, friends, etc., he who could regard them all with an equal eye as selves, excels in respect of fitness for the practice of Yoga.  
189 योगी उक्तप्रकारकर्मयोगनिष्ठः सततम् अहरहः योगकाले आत्मानं युञ्जीत, आत्मानं युक्तं कुर्वीत; स्वदर्शननिष्ठं कुर्वीत इत्यर्थः । रहसि जनवर्जिते निःशब्दे देशे स्थितः, एकाकी तत्रापि न सद्वितीयः, तत्रापि यतचित्तात्मा यतचित्तमनस्कः, निराशीः आत्मव्यतिरिक्ते कृत्स्ने वस्तुनिनिरपेक्षः, अपरिग्रहः तद्व्यतिरिक्ते कस्मिंश्चिद् अपि ममतारहितः । 10 । The Yogin who is steady in the practice of Karma Yoga, should 'constantly', i.e., daily when practising Yoga, fix his mind to the practice of Yoga, i.e., make himself engaged in the vision of the self. He must remain in a 'solitary place,' i.e., a place devoid of crowd and noise. And even there he must be 'all alone,' i.e., must not have a second person with him. He should 'control his thought and mind,' i.e., he should control the activities of thinking. He must be free from 'desire' , i.e., he should not depend on anything except the self and be without the 'sense of possession,' without the idea of mineness with regard to anything other than the self.  
190 शुचौ देशे अशुचिभिः पुरुषैः अनधिष्ठिते अपरिगृहीते च अशुचिभिः वस्तुभिः अस्पृष्टे च पवित्रीभूते देशे दार्वादिनिर्मितं नात्युच्छ्रितं नातिनीचं चैलाजिनकुशोत्तरम् आसनं प्रतिष्ठाप्य तस्मिन् मनः प्रसादकरे सापाश्रये उपविश्य योगैकाग्रम् अव्याकुलम् मनः कृत्वा यतचित्तेन्द्रियक्रियः सर्वात्मना उपसंहृतचित्तेन्द्रियक्रियः आत्मविशुद्धये बन्धविमुक्तये योगं युञ्ज्यात्, आत्मावलोकनं कुर्वीत । 11-12 । `In a clean spot,' i.e., in a spot pure in itself, not owned or controlled by impure persons and untouched by impure things; having 'established a firm seat,' a seat made of wood or similar material, which is neither too high nor too low; which is covered with cloth, deer-skin and Kusa grass in the reverse order; seated on it in a way which promotes the serenity of mind; having the mind concentrated on Yoga; and holding the activities of the mind and senses in check in all ways - he should practise'Yoga', i.e., practise the vision of the self for 'the purification of the self,' i.e., to end his bondage.  
191 कायशिरोग्रीवं समम् अचलं सापाश्रयतया स्थिरं धारयन् दिशश्च अनवलोकयन् स्वं नासिकाग्रंसंप्रेक्ष्य प्रशान्तात्मा अत्यन्तनिर्वृतमनाः विगतभीः ब्रह्मचर्ययुक्तो मनः संयम्य मच्चित्तो युक्तःअवहितो मत्पर आसीत माम् एव चिन्तयन् आसीत । 13-14। Keeping the trunk, head and neck erect and motionless; well seated in order to be steady; looking not in any direction but gazing at the tip of the nose; serene, i.e., holding the mind extremely peaceful; fearless; firmin the vow of celibacy; holding the mind in check; and fixing his thoughts on Me - he should sit in Yoga, i.e., remain concentrated and intent on Me, i.e., he should remain concentrating on Me only.  
192 एवं मयि परस्मिन् ब्रह्मणि पुरुषोत्तमे मनसः शुभाश्रये सदा आत्मानं मनो युञ्जन् नियतमानसःनिश्चलमानसः मत्स्पर्शपवित्रीकृतमानसतया निश्चलमानसः मत्संस्थां निर्वाणपरमां शान्तिम्अधिगच्छति निर्वाणकाष्ठारूपां मत्संस्थां मयि संस्थितां शान्तिम् अधिगच्छति । 15 । 'Ever applying his mind on Me,' i.e., the Supreme Brahman, the Supreme Person and the holy and auspicious object of meditation, 'the Yogin of controlled mind,' i.e., one having his mind steady because of his being purified in mind through contact with Me, comes to the peace which abides in Me, which is of the highest degree of beatitude. That means he comes to the peace which is the supreme end of beatitude which abides in Me.  
193 एवम् आत्मयोगम् आरभमाणस्य मनोनैर्मल्यहेतुभूतां मनसो भगवति शुभाश्रये स्थितिम् अभिधाय अन्यद् अपि योगोपकरणम् आह -अत्यशनानशने योगविरोधिनी, अतिविहाराविहारौ च तथातिमात्रस्वप्नजागर्ये तथा च अत्यायासानायासौ । 16 । For the person who commences Yoga of the self, Sri Krshna, after thus teaching how the mind should be fixed on the Lord, who is the holy and auspicious object of meditation, proceeds in order to effect the purification of the mind, to speak of the other side of Yoga:Over-eating and excessive fasting are opposed to Yoga. So also are excessive recreation and non-recreation, too much of sleep and too muchof vigil. So too, are overwork and idleness.  
194 मिताहारविहारस्य मितायासस्य मितस्वप्नावबोधस्य सकलदुःखहा बन्धनाशनो योगः संपन्नो भवति । 17 । The 'yoga which destroys all sorrows,' i.e., unties bondages, is successfully practised by him who is temperate in eating and recreation, temperate in exertion, and temperate in sleep and vigil.  
195 यदा प्रयोजनविषयं चित्तम् आत्मनि एव विनियतं विशेषेण नियतं निरतिशयप्रयोजनतया तत्रैव नियतं निश्चलम् अवतिष्ठते तदा सर्वकामेभ्यो निःस्पृहः सन् युक्त इति उच्यते योगार्ह इति उच्यते । 18 । When the mind which usually goes after sense enjoyments, abandons such desires and 'rests on the self alone,' i.e., becomes well-settled on account of discerning unsurpassable good in the self alone and rests therealone steadily, without movement - then, being 'free of yearning for all desires,' one is said to be integrated. He is said to be fit for Yoga.  
196 निवातस्थो दीपो यथा न इङ्गते न चलति, अचलः सप्रभः तिष्ठति, यतचित्तस्य निवृत्तसकलेतरमनोवृत्तेः योगिनः आत्मनि योगं युञ्जतः आत्मस्वरूपस्य सा उपमा ।निवातस्थतया निश्चलसप्रभदीपवन्निवृत्तसकलेतरमनोवृत्तितया निश्चलो ज्ञानप्रभ आत्मा तिष्ठति इत्यर्थः । 19 । As a lamp does not flicker in a windless place, i.e., does not move, but remains steady with its illumination - this is the simile used to illustrate the nature of the self of the Yogin who has subdued his mind, who has got rid of all other kinds of mental activity and who is practising Yogaconcerning the self. The meaning is that the self remains with its steadilyillumining light of knowledge because all other activities of the mind have ceased, just as a lamp kept in a windless place has an unflickering flame.  
197 योगसेवया हेतुना सर्वत्र निरुद्धं चित्तं यत्र योगे उपरमते अतिशयितसुखम् इदम् एव इति रमते,यत्र च योगे आत्मना मनसा आत्मानं पश्यन् अन्यनिरपेक्षम् आत्मनि एव तुष्यति । 20 । Where, through the practice of Yoga, the mind, which is subdued everywhere by such practice, 'rejoices', i.e., rejoices in surpassing felicity;and where, perceiving through Yoga 'the self (Atman)' by 'the mind (Atman)' one is delighted by the self and indifferent to all other objects;and where, through Yoga, one 'knows', i.e., experiences that infinite happiness which can be grasped only by the 'intellect' contemplating on the self, but is beyond the grasp of the senses; where, remaining in that Yoga, one does not 'swerve from that state,' because of the overwhelming happiness that state confers; having gained which, he desires for it alone, even when he is awakened from Yoga, and does not hold anything else as a gain; where one is not moved even by 'the heaviest sorrow' caused by any bereavement like that of a virtuous son - let him know that disunion from all union with pain, i.e., which forms the opposite of union with pain, is called by the term Yoga. This Yoga must be practised with the determination of its nature as such from the beginning with a mind free from despondency, i.e., with zestful exaltation.  
198 यत्तद् अतीन्द्रियम् आत्मबुद्ध्येकग्राह्यम् आत्यन्तिकं सुखं यत्र च योगे वेत्ति अनुभवति यत्र च योगे स्थितः सुखातिरेकेण तत्त्वतः तद्भावात् न चलति । 21 । Where, through the practice of Yoga, the mind, which is subdued everywhere by such practice, 'rejoices', i.e., rejoices in surpassing felicity;and where, perceiving through Yoga 'the self (Atman)' by 'the mind (Atman)' one is delighted by the self and indifferent to all other objects;and where, through Yoga, one 'knows', i.e., experiences that infinite happiness which can be grasped only by the 'intellect' contemplating on the self, but is beyond the grasp of the senses; where, remaining in that Yoga, one does not 'swerve from that state,' because of the overwhelming happiness that state confers; having gained which, he desires for it alone, even when he is awakened from Yoga, and does not hold anything else as a gain; where one is not moved even by 'the heaviest sorrow' caused by any bereavement like that of a virtuous son - let him know that disunion from all union with pain, i.e., which forms the opposite of union with pain, is called by the term Yoga. This Yoga must be practised with the determination of its nature as such from the beginning with a mind free from despondency, i.e., with zestful exaltation.  
199 यं योगं लब्ध्वा योगाद् विरतः तम् एव काङ्क्षमाणो न अपरं लाभं मन्यते, यस्मिन् च योगेस्थितः अविरतः अपि गुणवत्पुत्रवियोगादिना गुरुणा अपि दुःखेन न विचाल्यते । 22 । Where, through the practice of Yoga, the mind, which is subdued everywhere by such practice, 'rejoices', i.e., rejoices in surpassing felicity;and where, perceiving through Yoga 'the self (Atman)' by 'the mind (Atman)' one is delighted by the self and indifferent to all other objects;and where, through Yoga, one 'knows', i.e., experiences that infinite happiness which can be grasped only by the 'intellect' contemplating on the self, but is beyond the grasp of the senses; where, remaining in that Yoga, one does not 'swerve from that state,' because of the overwhelming happiness that state confers; having gained which, he desires for it alone, even when he is awakened from Yoga, and does not hold anything else as a gain; where one is not moved even by 'the heaviest sorrow' caused by any bereavement like that of a virtuous son - let him know that disunion from all union with pain, i.e., which forms the opposite of union with pain, is called by the term Yoga. This Yoga must be practised with the determination of its nature as such from the beginning with a mind free from despondency, i.e., with zestful exaltation.  
200 तं दुःखसंयोगवियोगं दुःखसंयोगप्रत्यनीकाकारं योगशब्दाभिधेयं ज्ञानं विद्यात्, स एवंभूतो योगःइत्यारम्भदशायां निश्चयेन अविर्विण्णचेतसा हृष्टचेतसा योगो योक्तव्यः । 23 । Where, through the practice of Yoga, the mind, which is subdued everywhere by such practice, 'rejoices', i.e., rejoices in surpassing felicity;and where, perceiving through Yoga 'the self (Atman)' by 'the mind (Atman)' one is delighted by the self and indifferent to all other objects;and where, through Yoga, one 'knows', i.e., experiences that infinite happiness which can be grasped only by the 'intellect' contemplating on the self, but is beyond the grasp of the senses; where, remaining in that Yoga, one does not 'swerve from that state,' because of the overwhelming happiness that state confers; having gained which, he desires for it alone, even when he is awakened from Yoga, and does not hold anything else as a gain; where one is not moved even by 'the heaviest sorrow' caused by any bereavement like that of a virtuous son - let him know that disunion from all union with pain, i.e., which forms the opposite of union with pain, is called by the term Yoga. This Yoga must be practised with the determination of its nature as such from the beginning with a mind free from despondency, i.e., with zestful exaltation.  
201 स्पर्शजाः सङ्कल्पजाश्च इति द्विविधाः कामाः, स्पर्शजाः शीतोष्णादयः, सङ्कल्पजाः पुत्रपौत्रक्षेत्रादयः, तत्र सङ्कल्पप्रभवाः स्वरूपेण एव त्यक्तुं शक्याः, तान् सर्वान् मनसा एव तदनन्वयानुसन्धानेन त्यक्त्वा स्पर्शजेषु अवर्जनीयेषु तन्निमित्तहर्षोद्वेगौ त्क्त्वा समन्ततः सर्वस्माद् विषयात् सर्वम् इन्द्रियग्रामं विनियम्य शनैः शनैः धृतिगृहीतया विवेकविषयया बुद्ध्या सर्वस्माद् आत्मव्यतिरिक्ताद् उपरम्य आत्मसंस्थं मनः कृत्वा न किञ्चिद् अपि चिन्तयेत् । 24-25 । There are two kinds of desires: 1) those born of contact between the senses and objects like heat, cold etc.; 2) those generated by our mind (will) like that for sons, land etc. Of these, the latter type of desires are by their own nature relinquishable. Relinquishing all these by the mind through contemplation on their lack of association with the self; having relinquished the ideas of pleasure and pain inrespect of unavoidable desires resulting from contact; restraining all the senses on all sides, i.e., from contact with all their objects - one should think of nothing else, i.e., other than the self. Little by little 'with the help of intellect controlled by firm resolution,' i.e., by the power of discrimination, one should think of nothing else, having fixed the mind on the self .  
202 चलस्वभावतया आत्मनि अस्थिरं मनः यतो विषयप्रावण्यहेतोः बहिः निश्चरति ततः ततो यत्नेन मनो नियम्य आत्मनि एव अतिशयितसुखभावनया वशं नयेत् । 26 । Wherever the mind, on account of its fickle and unsteady nature, wanders becauseof its proclivity to sense-objects, he should, subduing the mind everywhere with effort, bring it under control in order to remain in the self alone by contemplating on the incomparable bliss therein.  
203 प्रशान्तमनसम् आत्मनि निश्चलमनसम् आत्मन्यस्तमनसं तत एव हेतोः दग्धाशेषकल्मषं तत एव शान्तरजसं विनष्टरजोगुणं तत  एव ब्रह्मभूतं स्वस्वरूपेणावस्थितम् एनं योगिनम् आत्मानुभवरूपम् उत्तमं सुखम् उपैति, हि इति हेतौ, उत्तमसुखरूपम् उपैति इत्यर्थः । 27 । Supreme happiness, which is of the nature of experience of the self in its essentialnature comes to this Yogin whose 'mind is at peace,' i.e., whose mind does not swerve from the self, whose mind abides in the self; whose impurities are thereby completely burnt away; whose Rajas is thereby 'wholly annulled,' i.e., in whom thequality of Rajas is destroyed; and who has thus become the Brahman, i.e., who remains steady in his essential nature as the Atman. 'Hi' (for) is added to indicate reason. The meaning is this: 'On account of the nature of the self which has the form of supreme bliss.'  
204 एवम् उक्तप्रकारेण आत्मानं युञ्जन्  तेन एव विगतप्राचीनसमस्तकल्पषः ब्रह्मसंस्पर्शं ब्रह्मानुभवरूपं सुखम् अत्यन्तम् अपरिमितं सुखेन अनायासेन सदा अश्नुते । 28 । Thus, in the above said manner, devoting himself to theYoga of the self and by that means expelling all old impurities, the Yogin attains 'perfect' , i.e., boundless felicity at all times easily, without stress and strain. The felicity is born of the contact with the Brahman (Atman), meaning the joy of experience of the Brahman.  
205 अथ योगविपाकदशा चतुष्प्रकारा उच्यते -स्वात्मनः परेषां च भूतानां प्रकृतिवियुक्तस्वरूपाणां ज्ञानैकाकारतया साम्याद् वैषम्यस्य चप्रकृतिगतत्वाद् योगयुक्तात्मा प्रकृतिवियुक्तेषु आत्मसु सर्वत्र ज्ञानैकाकारतया समदर्शनःसर्वभूतस्थं स्वात्मानं सर्वभूतानि च स्वात्मनि ईक्षते । सर्वभूतसमानाकारं स्वात्मानं स्वात्मसमानाकाराणि च सर्वभूतानि पश्यति इत्यर्थः ।एकस्मिन् आत्मनि दृष्टे सर्वस्य आत्मवस्तुनः तत्साम्यात् सर्वम् आत्मवस्तु दृष्टं भवति इत्यर्थः । सर्वत्र समदर्शनः इति वचनात् 'योऽयं योगस्त्वया प्रोक्तः साम्येन' (गीता 6।33) इत्यनुभाषणाच्च 'निर्दोषं हि समं ब्रह्म' (गीता 5।19) इति वचनाच्च । 29 । Now Sri Krshna says that the mature stage of Yoga consists of four degrees, as stated in the succeeding verses from 29th to 32nd.(i) On account of the similarity between one self and other selves when They are separated from Prakrti (i.e.,the body), all selves are by Themselves only of the nature of knowledge. Inequalities pertain only to Prakrti or the bodies they are embodied in. One whose mind is fixed in Yoga has the experience of the sameness of the nature of all the selves as centres of intelligence, the perceived difference being caused only by the body. When separated from the body all are alike because of their being forms of centres of intelligence. An enlightened Yogin therefore sees himself as abiding in all beings and all beings abiding in his self in the sense that he sees the similarity of the selves in himself and in every being.When one self is visualised, all selves become visualised, because of the similarity of all selves. This is supported by the statements: 'He sees samenesseverywhere' (6.29). The same is again referred to in, 'This Yoga of equality which has been declared by you' (6.33), and the statement 'The Brahman when uncontaminated is the same everywhere' (5.19).  
206 ततो विपाकदशाम् आपन्नो मम साधर्म्यम् उपागतः 'निऱञ्जनः परमं साम्यमुपैति' (मु0 उ0 3।1।3) इत्युच्यमानं सर्वस्य आत्मवस्तु विधूतपुण्यपापस्य स्वरूपेण अवस्थितस्य मत्साम्यं पश्यन् यः सर्वत्र आत्मवस्तुनि मां पश्यति, सर्वम् आत्मवस्तु च मयि पश्यति, अन्योन्यसाम्याद्अन्यतरदर्शनेन अन्यतरद् अपि ईदृशम् इति पश्यति, तस्य स्वात्मस्वरूपं पश्यतः अहं तत्साम्यात् न प्रणश्यामि, न अदर्शनम् उपयामि, मम अपि मां पश्यतः, मत्साम्यात् स्वात्मानं मत्समम् अवलोकयन् स न अदर्शनम् उपयाति । 30 । (ii) He who, having reached the highest stage of maturity, views similarity of naturewith Me, i.e., sees similarity of all selves to Myself when They are freed from goodand evil and when they remain in Their own essence, as declared in the Sruti, 'Stainless he attains supreme degree of equality' (Mun.U.3.1.3); and 'sees Me in all selves and sees all selves in Me.' That is, on viewing one of Them (selves), one views another also to be the same, because of their similarity to one another. To him who perceives the nature of his own self, I am not lost on account of My similarity to him i.e., I do not become invisible to him. He (the Yogin) viewing his own self as similar to Me, always remains within My sight when I am viewing Myself, because of similarity of his self with Me.  
207 ततो विपाकदशाम् आह -योगदशायां सर्वभूतस्थितं माम् असंकुचितज्ञानैकाकारतया एकत्वम् आस्थितः प्राकृतभेद-परित्यागेन सुदृढं यो भजते स योगी व्युस्थानकाले अपि यथा तथा वर्तमानः स्वात्मानं सर्वभूतानि च पश्यन् मयि वर्तते माम् एव पश्यति । स्वात्मनि सर्वभूतेषु च सर्वदा मत्साम्यम् एव पश्यति इत्यर्थः । 31 । Sri Krshna describes a still more mature steps (of Yoga) -(iii) The Yogin who, fixed in the state of Yoga in oneness because he has the sameform of uncontracted knowledge (as Myself), worships Me steadfastly by renouncing the differences of the Prakrti (i.e., of the body) - then that Yogin, even while coming out of Yoga; howsoever he may live, views Me only, when viewing his own self and all other beings. The meaning is that he views his similarity to Myself in his own self and in the self of all beings.  
208 ततोऽपि काष्ठाम् आह -आत्मनः च अन्येषां च आत्मनाम् असंकुचितज्ञानैकाकारतया औपम्येन स्वात्मनि च अन्येषु सर्वत्र वर्तमानं पुत्रजन्मादिरूपं सुखं तन्मरणादिरूपं च दुःखम् असम्बन्धसाम्यात समं यः पश्यति परपुत्रजन्ममरणादिकं यः पश्यति इत्यर्थः । स योगी परमयोगकाष्ठां गतो मतः । 32 । Now Sri Krshna proceeds to speak of the maturest stage beyond this:(iv) He who - because of the similarity between his own self and other selves, as they are all constituted similarly of uncontracted knowledge in their essential being - views the pleasures in the form of the birth of a son and the sorrows in the form of the death of a son of his own and of others, as equal, on the ground of theirequal unrelatedness to such pleasures and pains to him. Viewing his own pleasures and pains of the above description as being not different from those of others of the same kind - that Yogin is deemed the highest; he is judged as having reached the summit of Yoga. [The idea is to prevent misconstruing the verse as meaning that one shares the joy and misery of all as his own. It means only that the highest type of yogins understand that the self is unrelated to the pain and pleasures of his own body-mind. He understands also that the same is the casewith other selves].  
209 अर्जुन उवाचयः अयं देवमनुष्यादिभेदेन जीवेश्वरभेदेन च अत्यन्तभिन्नतया एतावन्तं कालम् अनुभूतेषु सर्वेषु आत्मसु ज्ञानैकाकारतया परस्परसाम्येन अकर्मवश्यतया परस्परसाम्येन अकर्मवश्यतया च ईश्वरसाम्येन सर्वत्र समदर्शनरूपो योगः त्वया उक्तः, एतस्य योगस्य स्थिरां स्थितं न पश्यामि मनसः चञ्चलत्वात् । 33 । This Yoga as explained by you consists in maintaining equality of vision everywhere, viz., i) among themselves which have been so far known to be of different kinds such as gods and men, and ii) between the individual selves and the Supreme, in so far as (a) all the selves are of the same form of knowledge, and (b) in so far as the individual self; (i.e., the released soul) and the Supreme are alike free from Karma. I do not see how thisYoga can be steadily established in my mind, fickle as the mind is.  
210 तथा हि अनवरताभ्यस्तविषयेषु अपि स्वत एव चञ्चलं पुरुषेण एकत्र स्थापयितुम् अशक्यं मनः पुरुषं बलात् प्रमथ्य दृढम् अन्यत्र चरति । तस्य स्वाभ्यस्तविषयेषु अपि चञ्चलस्वभावस्य मनसः तद्विपरीताकारात्मनि स्थापयितुं निग्रहं प्रतिकूलगतेः महावातस्य व्यजनादिना इव सुदुष्करम् अहं मन्ये । मनोनिग्रहोपायो वक्तव्य इत्यभिप्रायः । 34 । For the mind, which is found to be fickle even in matters incessantly practised, cannot be firmly fixed by a person in one place. It agitates that person violently and flies away stubbornly elsewhere. Regarding such a mind, which by nature is fickle even in matters practised, I regard that its restraint and fixing in the self, which is of quite opposite nature, is as difficult as restraining a strong contrary gale with such things as a fragile fan etc. The meaning is that the means for the restraint of the mind should be explained.  
211 श्री भगवानुवाचचलस्वभातया मनो दुर्निग्रहम् एव इत्यत्र न संशयः, तथापि आत्मनो गुणाकरत्वाभ्यास-जनिताभिमुख्येन आत्मव्यतिरिक्तेषु विषयेषु अपि दोषाकरत्वदर्शनजनितवैतृष्ण्येन च कथञ्चिद् गृह्यते । 35 । No doubt, the mind is hard to subdue on account of its fickle nature. However, it can be subdued with difficulty by cultivating favourable attitude in the direction of the self by repeated contemplation of Its being a mine of auspicious attributes (these being eternality, self-luminosity, bliss, freedom from Karma, purity etc. ), and by the absence of hankering produced by seeing the host of evil qualities inobjects other than the self hankered for.  
212 असंयतात्मना अजितमनसा महता अपि बलेन योगो दुष्प्राप एव । उपायतः तु वश्यात्मना पूर्वोक्तेन मदाराधनरूपेण अन्तर्गतज्ञानेन कर्मणा जितमनसा यतमानेन अयम् एव समदर्शनरूपो योगः अवाप्तुं शक्यः । 36 । Yoga is hard to attain even in spite of great efforts by one of unrestrained self, i.e., of unrestrained mind. But the same Yoga which is of the form of sameness of vision can be attained by proper means by one who is striving, whose 'mind is subdued,' i.e., by one whose mind is conquered by works (Karma Yoga) taught before, which is of the nature of My worship and which includes within itself knowledge (Jnana).  
213 अथ 'नेहाभिक्रमनाशोऽस्ति' (गीता 2।40) इत्यादौ एव श्रुतं योगमाहात्म्यं यथावत् श्रोतुम् अर्जुनः पृच्छति । अन्तर्गतात्माज्ञानतया योगशिरस्कतया च हि कर्मयोगस्य माहात्म्यं तत्रोदितं तच्च योगमाहात्म्यम् एव -अर्जुन उवाचश्रद्धया योगे प्रवृत्तो दृढतराभ्यासरूपयत्नवैकल्येन योगसंसिद्धिम् अप्राप्य योगात् चलितमानसः कां गतिं गच्छति । 37 । Then Arjuna puts questions in order to hear the greatness of Yoga, as it really is, which he has already heard about at the beginning of the teaching, 'Here there is no loss of effort' (2.40). There the greatness of Karma Yoga as, inclusive of knowledge of the self with Yoga as its culmination was taught. This alone is the real greatness of Yoga.What way does he go, who has embarked on Yoga endowed with faith, but who by inadequacy of exertion in practice, does not gain success in Yoga and has his mind wandering from Yoga? Does he not perish like a small piece of cloud torn from a large mass of cloud - perish without reaching another large mass of cloud? Now does he not fall away from both (sides)? He has no Support and is confused on the path leading to the Brahman. He is without any support in the sense thatKarma or rituals which constitutes the means of heaven etc., does not give supportfor a person who is devoid of attachment to fruits; for Karma is the means for generating its own fruits. He is also confused in the path leading to the Brahman on which he has just begun to traverse; He has lost his way. Does he then get lostby falling down from both sides, these being attainment of heaven on the one handand liberation on the other. Does he not thus perish? You should remove this doubt altogether from my mind; for there is no other remover of this doubt than You, who always perceive directly all matters simultaneously.  
214 उभयविभ्रष्टः अयं छिन्नाभ्रम् इव कच्चित् न नश्यति यथा मेघशकलः पूर्वस्मात् महतो मेघात् छिन्नः परं महान्तं मेघम् अप्राप्य मध्ये विनष्टो भवति, तथा एव कच्चित् न नश्यति, कथम्उभयविभ्रष्टता, अप्रतिष्ठो विमूढो ब्रह्मणः पथि इति, यथावस्थितं स्वर्गादिसाधनभूतं कर्मफलाभिसन्धिरहितस्य अस्य पुरुषस्य स्वफलसाधनत्वेन प्रतिष्ठा न भवति इति अप्रतिष्ठः । प्रकान्ते ब्रह्मणः पथि विमूढः तस्मात् पथः प्रच्युतः, अथ उभयभ्रष्टतया किम् अयं नश्यति एव,उत न नश्यति । 38 । Then Arjuna puts questions in order to hear the greatness of Yoga, as it really is, which he has already heard about at the beginning of the teaching, 'Here there is no loss of effort' (2.40). There the greatness of Karma Yoga as, inclusive of knowledge of the self with Yoga as its culmination was taught. This alone is the real greatness of Yoga.What way does he go, who has embarked on Yoga endowed with faith, but who by inadequacy of exertion in practice, does not gain success in Yoga and has his mind wandering from Yoga? Does he not perish like a small piece of cloud torn from a large mass of cloud - perish without reaching another large mass of cloud? Now does he not fall away from both (sides)? He has no Support and is confused on the path leading to the Brahman. He is without any support in the sense thatKarma or rituals which constitutes the means of heaven etc., does not give supportfor a person who is devoid of attachment to fruits; for Karma is the means for generating its own fruits. He is also confused in the path leading to the Brahman on which he has just begun to traverse; He has lost his way. Does he then get lostby falling down from both sides, these being attainment of heaven on the one handand liberation on the other. Does he not thus perish? You should remove this doubt altogether from my mind; for there is no other remover of this doubt than   
215 तम् एनं संशयम् अशेषतः छेत्तुम् अर्हसि स्वतः प्रत्यक्षेण युगपत् सर्वं सर्वदा स्वत एव पश्यतः त्वत्तः अन्यः संशयस्य अस्य छेत्ता न हि उपपद्यते । 39 । Then Arjuna puts questions in order to hear the greatness of Yoga, as it really is, which he has already heard about at the beginning of the teaching, 'Here there is no loss of effort' (2.40). There the greatness of Karma Yoga as, inclusive of knowledge of the self with Yoga as its culmination was taught. This alone is the real greatness of Yoga.What way does he go, who has embarked on Yoga endowed with faith, but who by inadequacy of exertion in practice, does not gain success in Yoga and has his mind wandering from Yoga? Does he not perish like a small piece of cloud torn from a large mass of cloud - perish without reaching another large mass of cloud? Now does he not fall away from both (sides)? He has no Support and is confused on the path leading to the Brahman. He is without any support in the sense thatKarma or rituals which constitutes the means of heaven etc., does not give supportfor a person who is devoid of attachment to fruits; for Karma is the means for generating its own fruits. He is also confused in the path leading to the Brahman on which he has just begun to traverse; He has lost his way. Does he then get lostby falling down from both sides, these being attainment of heaven on the one handand liberation on the other. Does he not thus perish? You should remove this doubt altogether from my mind; for there is no other remover of this doubt than   
216 श्री भगवानुवाचश्रद्धया योगे प्रक्रान्तस्य तस्मात् प्रच्युतस्य इह च अमुत्र च विनाशः न विद्यते, प्राकृतस्वर्गादि-भोगानुभवे ब्रह्मानुभवे च अभिलषितानवाप्तिरूपः प्रत्यवायाख्यः अनिष्टावाप्तिरूपश्च विनाशो न विद्यते इत्यर्थः । न हि निरतिशयकल्याणरूपयोगकृत् कश्चित् कालत्रये अपि दुर्गतिं गच्छति । 40 । Neither here nor there is destruction for him who has begun Yoga with faith and has then fallen away from it. The meaning is that there is no destruction either in the form of failure of attainment of desires or in the form of pratyavaya, which means the attainment of what is undesirable because of defects in the performanceof works. Therefore no one who practises this incomparably auspicious Yoga ever comes to an evil end in the present, past or future.  
217 कथम् अयं भविष्यति? इत्यत्राह -यज्जातीयभोगाभिकाङ्क्षया योगात् प्रच्युतः अयम् अतिपुण्यकृतां प्राप्यान् लोकान् प्राप्य तज्जातीयान् अतिकल्याणभोगान् ज्ञानोपाययोगमाहात्म्याद् एव भुञ्जानो यावत् तद्भोग-तृष्णावसानं शाश्वतीः समाः तत्र उषित्वा तस्मिन् भोगे वितृष्णः शुचीनां श्रीमतां योगोपक्रम-योग्यानां कुले योगोपक्रमे भ्रष्टो योगमाहात्म्याद् जायते । 41 । Sri Krshna explains how this is so: This person, who had wandered away from Yoga because of desire for whatever kind of enjoyments, he will gain those very enjoyments through the excellence of Yoga alone. Having attained to the worlds of those who do meritorious acts, he will dwell there for a long time, i.e., till his desire for such enjoyments gets exhausted. Then, devoid of desire for these enjoyment, this person who hasswerved from Yoga at the very beginning of Yoga, is born, by virtue of the excellence of Yoga, in a family of those who are competent to practise Yoga.  
218 परिपक्वयोगः चलितः चेद् योगिनां धीमतां योगं कुर्वतां स्वयम् एव, योगोपदेष्टॄणां कुले भवति ।तद् एतद् उभयविधं योगयोग्यानां योगिनां च कुले जन्म लोके प्राकृतानां दुर्लभतरम्, एतत् तुयोगमाहात्म्यकृतम् । 42 । If one swerves from the right path at an advanced stage of Yoga, he will be born in a family of wise Yogins who practice Yoga and are themselves capable of teaching Yoga. Thus, these two types of birth - one in the family of those who are fit to practise Yoga and the other in that of accomplished Yogins - are hardly met with among common people in this world. But Yoga is of such great potentialitythat even this rare blessing is achieved through it.  
219 तत्र जन्मनि तम् एव पौर्वदैहिकं योगविषयं बुद्विसंयोगं लभते । ततः सुप्तप्रबुद्धवद् भूयः संसिद्धौ यतते । यथा न अन्तरायहतो भवति, तथा यतते । 43 । There, in that existence, he regains the mental disposition for Yoga that he had in the previous birth. Like one awakened from sleep, he strives again from where he had left before attaining complete success. He strives so as not to be defeated by impediments. This person who has fallen away from Yoga is borne on towards Yoga alone by his previous practice, i.e., by the older practice with regard to Yoga. This power of Yoga is well known. Even a person, who has not engaged in Yoga but has only been desirous of knowing Yoga, i.e., has failed to follow it up, acquires once again the same desire to practise Yoga. He then practises Yoga, of which the first stage is Karma Yoga, and transcends Sabda-brahman (or Brahman which is denotable by words). The Sabda-brahman is the Brahman capable of manifesting as gods, men, earth, sky, heaven etc., namely, Prakrti. The meaning is that having been liberated from the bonds of Prakrti, he attains the self which is incapable of being named by such words as gods, men etc., and which comprises solely of knowledge and beatitude.  
220 तेन पूर्वाभ्यासेन पूर्वेण योगविषयेण अभ्यासेन सः योगभ्रष्टो हि अवशः अपि योगे एव ह्रियते,प्रसिद्धं हि एतद् योगमाहात्म्यम् इत्यर्थः । अप्रवृत्तयोगो योगजिज्ञासुः अपि ततः चलितमानसः पुनरपि ताम् एव जिज्ञासां प्राप्य कर्मयोगादिकं योगम् अनुष्ठाय शब्दब्रह्म अतिवर्तते ।शब्दब्रह्म देवमनुष्यपृथिव्यन्तरिक्षस्वर्गादिशब्दाभिलापयोग्यं ब्रह्म प्रकृतिः, प्रकृतिसम्बन्धाद् विमुक्तो देवमनुष्यादिशब्दाभिलापानर्हं ज्ञानानन्दैकतानम् आत्मानं प्राप्नोति इत्यर्थः । 44 । There, in that existence, he regains the mental disposition for Yoga that he had in the previous birth. Like one awakened from sleep, he strives again from where he had left before attaining complete success. He strives so as not to be defeated by impediments. This person who has fallen away from Yoga is borne on towards Yoga alone by his previous practice, i.e., by the older practice with regard to Yoga. This power of Yoga is well known. Even a person, who has not engaged in Yoga but has only been desirous of knowing Yoga, i.e., has failed to follow it up, acquires once again the same desire to practise Yoga. He then practises Yoga, of which the first stage is Karma Yoga, and transcends Sabda-brahman (or Brahman which is denotable by words). The Sabda-brahman is the Brahman capable of manifesting as gods, men, earth, sky, heaven etc., namely, Prakrti. The meaning is that having been liberated from the bonds of Prakrti, he attains the self which is incapable of being named by such words as gods, men etc., and which comprises solely of knowledge and beatitude.  
221 यत एवं योगमाहात्म्यम्; ततः -अनेकजन्मार्जितपुण्यसञ्चयैः संशुद्धकिल्बिषः संसिद्धः संजातः प्रयत्नाद् यतमानः तु योगी चलितः अपि पुनः परां गतिं याति एव । 45 । After thus describing the glory of Yoga the verse says:Because of such excellence of Yoga, through accumulation of merit collected in many births the Yogin striving earnestly, becomes cleansed from stains. Having become perfected, he reaches the supreme state, even though he had once gone astray.  
222 अतिशयितपुरुषार्थनिष्ठतया योगिनः सर्वस्माद् आधिक्यम् आह-केवलतपोभिः यः पुरुषार्थः साध्यते आत्मज्ञानव्यतिरिक्तैः ज्ञानैः च यः, यः च केवलैः अश्वमेधादिभिः कर्मभिः, तेभ्यः सर्वेभ्यः अधिकपुरुषार्थसाधनत्वात् योगस्य तपस्विभ्यः ज्ञानिभ्यः कर्मिभ्यश्च अधिको योगी तस्माद् योगी भव अर्जुन । 46 । Sri Krshna now speaks of the superiority of the Yogin above all others because of his being devoted to the supreme goal of human existence.Whatever end of human endeavour is attained by mere austerity, by knowledge of different subjects (i.e., different from experience of the self) and by mere rituals like the horse-sacrifice etc., greater than all these is the end achieved through Yoga. Consequently the Yogin is superior to those who practise austerity, to those who possess learning and to those who perform rituals. Therefore, O Arjuna, become a Yogin.  
223 तद् एवं परविद्याङ्गभूतं प्रजापतिवाक्योदितं प्रत्यगात्मदर्शनम् उक्तम् । अथ परविद्यां प्रस्तौति -योगिनाम् इति पञ्चम्यर्थे षष्ठी । सर्वभूतस्थम् इत्यादिना चतुर्विधा योगिनः प्रतिपादिताः, तेषु अनन्तर्गत्वाद्वक्ष्यमाणस्य योगिनः, न निर्धारणे षष्ठी संभवति ।अपि सर्वेषाम् इति सर्वशब्दनिर्दिष्टाः  तपस्विप्रभृतयः, तत्र अपि उक्तेन न्यायेन पञ्चम्यर्थो ग्रहीतव्यः, योगिभ्यः?अपि सर्वेभ्यो वक्ष्यमाणो योगी युक्ततमः, तदपेक्षया अवरत्वे तपस्वि-प्रभृतीनां योगिनां च न कश्चिद् विशेष इत्यर्थः । मेर्वपेक्षया सर्षपाणाम् इव; यद्यपि सर्षपेषु अन्योन्यन्यूनाधिकभावो विद्यते, तथापि मेर्वपेक्षया अवरत्वनिर्देशः समानः ।मत्प्रियत्वातिरेकेण अनन्यसाधारणस्वभावतया मद्गतेन अन्तरात्मना मनसा बाह्याभ्यन्तर-सकलवृत्तिविशेषाश्रयभूतं मनो हि अन्तरात्मा, अत्यर्थमत्प्रियत्वेन मया विना स्वधारणालाभात्मद्गतेन मनसा श्रद्धावान् अत्यर्थमत्प्रियत्वेन क्षणमात्रवियोगासहतया मत्प्राप्तिप्रवृत्तौ त्वरावान् यो मां भजते;मां विचित्रानन्तभोग्यभोक्तृवर्गभोगोपकरणभोगोपकरणभोगस्थानपरिपूर्णनिखिलजगदुदय-विभवलयलीलम् अस्पृष्टाशेषदोषानवधिकातिशयज्ञानबलैश्वर्यवीर्यशक्तितेजःप्रभृत्यसंख्येय-कल्याणगुणगणनिधिं स्वाभिमतानुरूपैकरूपाचिन्त्यदिव्याद्भुतनित्यनिरवद्यनिरतिशयौज्ज्वल्य-सौन्दर्यसौगन्ध्यसौकुमार्यलावण्यौवनाद्यनन्तगुण-निधिदिव्यरूपं वाङ्मनसापरिच्छेद्यस्वरूप-स्वभावम् अपारकारुण्यसौशील्यवात्सल्यौदार्यैश्वर्यमहोदधिम् अनालोचितविशेषाशेषलोक-शरण्यं प्रणतार्तिहरम् आश्रितवात्सल्यैकजलधिम् अखिलमनुजनयनविषयतां गतम् अजहत्स्वस्वभावं वसुदेवगृहे अवतीर्णम् अनवधिकातिशयतेजसा निखिलं जगद्भासयन्तम् आत्मकान्त्या विश्वम् आप्याययन्तं भजते, सेवते उपास्ते इत्यर्थः । स मे युक्ततमो मतः,स सर्वेभ्यः श्रेष्ठतम इति सर्वं सर्वदा यथावस्थितं स्वत एव साक्षात्कुर्वन् अहं मन्ये । 47 । Thus, so far the vision of the self, which has been expounded in the teaching of Prajapati as forming a part of supreme Vidya, has been taught; then Sri Krshna extols that supreme Vidya:'Yoginam', which is the genitive case, has to be taken in the sense of the ablative. In the verses beginning with, 'He sees the self as abiding in all beings' (6.29), Yogins at four degrees of attainment have been mentioned. Since theYogin who is now mentioned in this passage cannot be included in the four types mentioned earlier, the genitive case specifying one out of many will be inappropriate here.In 'api sarvesham,' those who practise austerities etc., are referred to by the word 'sarva' (all). According to the principle set forth, here also the case ending has to be taken as ablative. The meaning therefore is that the Yogin who is now referred to, is the most integrated compared with those mentioned earlier and all other types. Compared to this Yogin, the differences in point of superiority and inferiorityamong the other Yogins such as the performers of austerities etc., are of no significance like mustard-seeds compared to Mount Meru. Even though there exists smallness and bigness in relation to one another among mustard-seeds,still when compared to Meru, such distinctions among them have no significance, as they are all small compared to Meru. I consider him the most integrated who, with his innermost self; has his mind fixedon Me, on account of My being the only object of his overflowing love and also on account of his having a nature which cannot be supported by anything other than Myself; who has 'faith,' i.e., who strives rapidly to attain Me because, of his being unable to bear a moment's separation from Me on account of My being very dear to him; and who 'worships Me,' i.e., serves Me with devotion and meditates on Me - Me whose sportive delight brings about the origination, sustentation and dissolution of the entire cosmos filled with multifarious and innumerable objects of enjoyment, enjoyers, means and places of enjoyment; who is untouched by any evil without exception; whose divine figure is the treasure-house of innumerablemultitudes of auspicious, unlimited and unsurpassed attributes such as knowledge, power, lordship, energy, potency and splendour; whose divine figure is the treasure-house of infinite, unsurpassed attributes agreeable and highly worthy, such as radiance, beauty, fragrance,tenderness, pervading sweetness and youthfulness which are uniform, inconceivable and divine, wondrous, eternaland flawless; whose essential nature and qualities transcend all thought and words; who is the great ocean of compassion, condescension, paternal love and beauty; who is the impartial refuge of all beings without exception and withoutconsiderations of any difference; who is the reliever of the distress of supplicants; who is the great, unfathomable ocean of affection for supplicants; who has becomevisible to the eyes of all men without abandoning His essential nature; who has incarnated in the house of Vasudeva; who has made the entire world illumined withHis limitless and excellent glory; and who has satisfied the entire universe with the impeccable glory of beauty. The idea is that I, who by Myself alone see all things directly as they are, look upon him, the last mentioned type of Yogi here, as superior to all other types mentioned earlier.  
