497 अतीतेन अध्यायत्रयेण प्रकृतिपुरुषयोः विविक्तयोः संसृष्टयोः च याथात्म्यं तत्संसर्गवियोगयोः च गुणसङ्गतद्विपर्ययहेतुकत्वम्, सर्वप्रकारेण अवस्थितयोः प्रकृतिपुरुषयोः भगवद्विभूतित्वम्, विभूतिमतो भगवतो विभूतिभूताद् अचिद्वस्तुनः चिद्वस्तुनः च बद्धमुक्तोभयरूपाद् अव्ययत्व-व्यापनभरणस्वाम्यैः अर्थान्तरतया पुरुषोत्तमत्वेन याथात्म्यं च वर्णितम् । अनन्तरम् उक्तस्य अर्थस्य स्थेम्ने शास्त्रवश्यतां वक्तुं शास्त्रवश्यतद्विपरीतयोः देवासुरसर्गयोः विभागं श्रीभगवान् उवाच - श्रीभगवानुवाच इष्टानिष्टवियोगसंयोगरूपस्य दुःखस्य हेतुदर्शनजं दुःखं भयम्, तन्निवृत्तिः अभयम् । सत्त्वसंशुद्धिः सत्त्वस्य अन्तः करणस्य रजस्तमोभ्याम् असंस्पृष्टत्वम् । ज्ञानयोगव्यवस्थितिः प्रकृतिवियुक्तात्मस्वरूपविवेकनिष्ठा । दानं न्यायार्जितधनस्य पात्रे प्रतिपादनम् । दमः मनसो विषयौन्मुख्यनिवृत्तिसंशीलनम् । यज्ञः फलाभिसन्धिरहितभगवदाराधनरूपमहायज्ञाद्यनुष्ठानम् । स्वाध्यायः सविभूतेः भगवतः तदाराधनप्रकारस्य च प्रतिपादकः कृत्स्नो वेदः, इति अनुसंधाय वेदाभ्यासनिष्ठा ।तपः कृच्छ्रचान्द्रायणद्वादश्युपवासादेः भगवत्प्रीणनकर्मयोग्यतापादनस्य करणम् । आर्जवम् मनोवाक्कायकर्मवृत्तीनाम् एकनिष्ठता परेषु । 1 । THE DIVINE AND THE DEMONIAC TYPESIn the preceding three chapters were elucidated the following, (1) what constitutes the nature of the physical reality (Prakrti), i.e., of theindividual self (Purusha) taken separately and in conjunction with each other; (2) that their conjunction is the result of attachment to the Gunas, and their separation, the result of non-attachment; (3) that Prakrti and the individual self in whatever modes of existence they be, both constitute the glory (Vibhuti) of the Lord; and (4) that the real nature of the Lord as the Supreme Person is distinct from unconscient matter and conscient entity in both the states of bondage and freedom, as He is immutable, pervading, supporting and ruling.Immediately afterwards, the Lord speaks about the division into the divine and the demoniacal creations. This division is based upon whetherthe person denoted follows the Sastras or not. Those who follow the Sastras are classed as divine, and the others who violate them as demoniacal. The purpose of this teaching is to impress that submission to the Sastras is necessary for getting established in all the teachings given earlier including those on conduct. 'Fear' is the pain arising from the awareness of the cause which brings about pain in the form of either dissociation from the objects of attainment or association with the objects of aversion. The absence of this is 'fearlessness'. 'Purity of mind' is the condition of Sattva, viz., the state of the internal organ being untouched by Rajas and Tamas.'Devotion to meditation on the knowledge (of the self)' is firm adherence to the discrimination between the pure nature of the self and Prakrti. 'Alms-giving' is the giving away of one's wealth earned through right means to the deserving. 'Self-control' is the practice of withdrawal of themind from sense-objects. 'Worship' is the performance of the fivefold duties (sacrifices) etc., of life in the spirit ofworship of the Lord without attachment to the fruits. The 'study of the Vedas' is devotion to the Vedicstudy with the conviction that all the teachings of the Vedas deal with the Lord, with His glorious nature and with the mode of worshipping Him. 'Austerity' is the practice of penances like Krchra, Candrayana, vow on the twelfth day of the lunar fortnight, etc., which foster capability for performing acts pleasing to the Lord: 'Uprightness' consists of the oneness of thought, word and deed in one's dealings with others.  
498 अहिंसा परपीडावर्जनम् । सत्यं यथादृष्टार्थगोचरभूतहितवाक्यम् । अक्रोधः परपीडाफलचित्तविकाररहितत्वम् । त्यागः आत्महितप्रत्यनीकपरिग्रहविमोचनम् । शान्तिः इन्द्रियाणां विषयप्रावण्यनिरोधसंशीलनम् । अपैशुनं परानर्थकरवाक्यनिवेदनाकरणम् । दया भूतेषु सर्वेषु दुःखासहिष्णुत्वम् । अलोलुप्त्वम्, अलोलुपत्वम्, अलोलुत्वम् इति वा पाठः । विषयेषु निःस्पृहत्वम् इत्यर्थः । मार्दवम् अकाठिन्यम्, साधुजनसंश्लेषार्हता इत्यर्थः । ह्रीः अकार्यकरणे व्रीडा । अचापलं स्पृहणीयविषयसन्निधौ अचपलत्वम् । 2 । 'Non-injury' is abstaining from injury to others. 'Truth' is communication by words of what one knows for certain and what is conducive to the good of others. 'Freedom from anger' is the absence in oneself of the mental state, which, if permitted, leads to injury to others. 'Renunciation'is the abandonment of everything that is contrary to the good of the self. 'Tranquillity' is practice of controlling the senses from their propensity towards sense-objects. 'Not-slandering others' means refraining oneself from speech that may cause evil to others. 'Compassion to all beings' means one's incapacity' to stand the suffering of others. 'Aloluptvam'means freedom from desire for sense-objects. 'Gentleness' means absence of harshness, and being worthy of associating with the good. 'Sense 'of shame' is shrinking from doing what Should not be done. 'Acapalam' means being unattracted by objects enjoyable by the senses even when they are at hand.  
499 तेजः दुर्जनैः अनभिभवनीयत्वम् । क्षमा परनिमित्तपीडानुभवे अपि परेषु तं प्रति चित्तविकाररहितता । धृतिः महत्याम् अपि आपदि कृत्यकर्तव्यतावधारणम् । शौचं बाह्यान्तःकरणानां कृत्ययोग्यता शास्त्रीया । अद्रोहः परेषु अनुपरोधः; परेषु स्वच्छन्दवृत्तिनिरोधरहितत्वम् इत्यर्थः । नातिमानिता अस्थाने गर्वः अतिमानित्वम्, तद्रहितता । एते गुणा दैवीं संपदम् अभिजातस्य भवन्ति । देवसम्बन्धिनी संपत् दैवी; देवा भगवदाज्ञानुवृत्तिशीलाः, तेषां संपत् । सा च भगवदाज्ञानुवृत्तिः एव, ताम् अभिजातस्य ताम् अभिमुखीकृत्य जातस्य तां निर्वर्तयितुं जातस्य भवन्ति इत्यर्थः । 3 । 'Grandeur' is the quality by virtue of which one cannot be overpowered by the wicked. 'Forgiveness' is freedom from the feelings of antagonism towards others even when they cause injury to oneself. 'Fortitude' is the sense of determination to do one's own duty even under conditions of great danger. 'Purity' is fitness of the body and the mind as prescribed in the scriptures for the performance of sacred deeds. 'Freedom from hatred'is non-interference with others, viz., absence of interference in the actions of others according to their wish. 'Over-pride' (Atimanita) is having unbridled self-esteem; freedom from misplaced pride is meant here.These are the virtues that are found in one who is born for the 'divine destiny'. The destiny associated with the divinities is divine. The divinities are those who are devoted to carry out the commandments of the Lord. It is their destiny. It is obedience to the commandments of the Lord. The meaning is that these are endowments in those who are born with a tendency or disposition towards them and seek to attain their fulfilment.  
500 दम्भः धार्मिकत्वख्यापनाय धर्मानुष्ठानम् । दर्पः कृत्याकृत्याविवेककरो विषयानुभवनिमित्तो हर्षः । अतिमानः च स्वविद्याभिजनाननुगुणोऽभिमानः । क्रोधः परपीडाफलचित्तविकारः । पारुष्यं साधूनाम् उद्वेगकरः स्वभावः । अज्ञानं परावरतत्त्वकृत्याकृत्याविवेकः । एते स्वभावाः आसुरीं संपदम् अभिजातस्य भवन्ति । असुरा भगवदाज्ञातिवृत्तिशीलाः । 4 । 'Dambha or pomposity' is the practice of Dharma for earning a reputationfor righteousness. 'Arrogance' is the elation caused by the pleasures of sense-objects and the consequent inability to discriminate between what ought to be done and what ought not to be done. 'Self-conceit' is theestimation of oneself in a measure not warranted by one's education and birth. 'Wrath' is the sense of antagonism causing injury to others. 'Rudeness' is the nature of causing grief to Sadhus. 'Ignorance' is incapacity to discriminate between high and low forms of conduct and principles, and also between what ought to be done and what ought not to be. These are the qualities that are found in one born for a demoniac destiny. Asuras are those who rebel against the commandments of the Lord.  
501 दैवी मदाज्ञानुवृत्तिरूपा संपद् विमोक्षाय बन्धात् मुक्तये भवति क्रमेण मत्प्राप्तये भवति इत्यर्थः । आसुरी मदाज्ञातिवृत्तिरूपा संपद् निबन्धाय भवति, अधोगतिप्राप्तये भवति इत्यर्थः । एतत् श्रुत्वा स्वप्रकृत्यनिर्धारणाद् अतिभीताय अर्जुनाय एवम् आह - शोकं मा कृथाः, त्वं तु दैवीं संपदम् अभिजातः असि । हे पाण्डव धार्मिकाग्रेसरस्य हि पाण्डोः तनयः त्वम् इति अभिप्रायः । 5 । 'The divine destiny', viz. , which is of the nature of submission to My commandments aids liberation, viz., leads to release from bondage. The meaning is that it leads to the eventual attainment of Myself. 'The demoniac destiny' viz., which is of the nature of transgression of My commandments, is for bondage, i.e., takes one to degradation.To Arjuna who, on hearing this, became alarmed and anxious about the classfication of his own nature, Sri Krshna said:'Do not be grief-ridden. Surely, you are born for a divine destiny, a son of Pandu. The purport is that you have a divine destiny, since you are a son of Pandu who was most eminent among the righteous.  
502 अस्मिन् कर्मलोके कर्मकराणं भूतानां सर्गौ द्वौ द्विविधौ, दैवः च आसुरः च इति । सर्गः उत्पत्तिः, प्राचीनपुण्यपापरूपकर्मवशाद् भगवदाज्ञानुवृत्तितद्विपरीतकरणाय उत्पत्तिकाले एव विभागेन भूतानि उत्पद्यन्ते इत्यर्थः । तत्र दैवः सर्गो विस्तरशः प्रोक्तः । देवानां मदाज्ञानुवर्तिशीलानाम् उत्पत्तिः यदाचारकरणार्था, स आचारः कर्मयोगज्ञानयोगभक्तियोगरूपो विस्तरशः प्रोक्तः । असुराणां सर्गः च यदाचारकरणार्थः तम् आचारं मे शृणु, मम सकाशाच्छृणु । 6 । In this world of works, there are 'two types' of created beings who perform actions, viz., the divine and demoniac. Creation is production. By the force of old Karma of the nature of good and evil deeds, beings are born, divided into two kinds at their very birth for working out the commandments of the Lord or act contrary to them. Such is the meaning. Of these, the divine destiny has been told at length. For the purpose of working out their destiny in accordance with the mode of conduct, the creation of the godly, viz., of those devoted to My commandments, occurs; that mode of conduct, composed of Karma-jnana and Bhakti-Yogas has been described at length. To follow what conduct leads to the creation of demons - listen about that conduct.  
503 प्रवृत्तिं च निवृत्तिं च अभ्युदयसाधनं मोक्षसाधनं च वैदिकं धर्मम् आसुरा न विदुः न जानन्ति । न च शौचं वैदिककर्मयोग्यत्वं शास्त्रसिद्धम्, तद् बाह्यम् आभ्यन्तरं च असुरेषु न विद्यते । न अपि च आचारः, तद् बाह्याभ्यन्तरशौचं येन सन्ध्यावन्दनादिना आचारेण जायते, सः अपि आचारः तेषु न विद्यते । तथा उक्तम् - 'सन्ध्याहीनोऽशुचिर्नित्यमनर्हः सर्वकर्मसु ।' (दक्षस्मृति 2।23) इति । तथा सत्यं च तेषु न विद्यते सत्यं यथार्थज्ञानं भूतहितरूपभाषणं तेषु न विद्यते । 7 । The demoniac men do not know the 'path of action and renunciation', viz., the Vedic Dharma that leads to prosperity and final release. 'Cleanliness' is the competence for performing Vedic rites as established in the Sastras. That 'cleanliness', be it external or internal, is alien to thedemoniac. Nor 'right conduct', viz., that right conduct such as twilight prayers (Sandhya-vandana) etc, by means of which this internal and external cleanliness arises - even that right conduct is alien to them. For it is declared in: 'He who does not perform twilight prayers, is always unholy and is unfit for any rites' (Daksha Sm.2.23). Likewise, 'truth' is not found among them, viz., that truthful speech, which is conducive to the welfare of beings and which is in accordance with one's actual knowledge, does not characterise them.  
504 किं च -असत्यं जगत् एतत् सत्यशब्दनिर्दिष्टब्रह्मकार्यतया ब्रह्मात्मकम् इति न आहुः । अप्रतिष्ठं तथा ब्रह्मणि प्रतिष्ठितम् इति न वदन्ति । ब्रह्मणा अनन्तेन धृता हि पृथिवी, सर्वान् लोकान् बिभर्ति । यथोक्तम् 'तेनेयं नागवर्येण शिरसा विधृता मही । बिभर्ति मालां लोकानां सदेवासुरमानुषाम् ।।' (वि0 पु0 2।5।27) इति । अनीश्वरं सत्यसंकल्पेन परब्रह्मणा सर्वेश्वरेण मया एतत् नियमितम् इति च न वदन्ति । 'अहं सर्वस्य प्रभवो मत्तः सर्वं प्रवर्तते ।' (10।8) इति हि उक्तम् । वदन्ति च एवम्; अपरस्परसम्भूतं किम् अन्यत्? योषित्पुरुषयोः परस्परसम्बन्धेन जातम् इदं मनुष्यपश्वादिकम् उपलभ्यते । अनेवंभूतं किम् अन्यद् उपलभ्यते? किञ्चिद् अपि न उपलभ्यते इत्यर्थः । अतः सर्वम् इदं जगत् कामहेतुकम् इति । 8 । Moreover -They maintain that the universe is 'without truth,' viz., they do not acceptthat this universe, which is the effect of Brahman denoted by the term Satya, has Brahman for its Self. They contend that it is bereft of any 'foundation', viz., they do not accept that it has Brahman for its foundation. Brahman as Ananta supports the earth and bears all theworlds, as declared in 'This earth, sustained upon the head of this great serpent, supports in its turn, this garland of worlds, along with their men, demons and gods', (V.P.2;5.27). They say that it is 'without a Lord,' viz., they don't accept that this universe is controlled by Me, the Lord of all, the Supreme Brahman, whose will is always true. It has been already averred: 'I am the origin of all; from Me proceed everything' (10.8). And they also contend thus: 'What else can exist without mutual causation?' i.e., except by the union of the male and the female among men, beasts etc. What else exists apart from this nature? The meaning is that nothing else is seen. Therefore the entire world isrooted in sexual lust.  
505 एतां दृष्टिम् अवष्टभ्य अवलम्ब्य, नष्टात्मानः, अदृष्टदेहातिरिक्तात्मानः, अल्पबुद्धयः - घटादिवद् ज्ञेयभूते देहे ज्ञातृत्वेन देहव्यतिरिक्त आत्मा न उपलभ्यते, इति विवेकाकुशलाः । उग्रकर्माणः सर्वेषां हिंसकाः, जगतः क्षयाय प्रभवन्ति । 9 । Holding this view, viz., supporting this view, these men of lost souls do not realise that the self is different from the body. They are of 'feeble understanding', they lack the discernment that the self is to be known as different from the body, because of Its being the knower in the body which is an object of knowledge such as jars etc. These are of 'cruel deeds', viz., they do much harm to everybody; they are born to bring ruin to the world.  
506 दुष्पूरं दुष्प्रापविषयं कामम् आश्रित्य तत्सिषाधयिषया मोहाद् अज्ञानात् असद्ग्राहान् अन्यायगृहीतान् असत्परिग्रहान् गृहीत्वा अशुचिव्रताः अशास्त्रविहितव्रतयुक्ताः, दम्भमानमदान्विताः प्रवर्तन्ते । 10 । Turning to 'insatiable desires', viz., which concern objects impossible to get; seizing through 'delusion,' viz., through ignorance that such desires can be fulfilled only with 'unjustly acquired wealth', viz., with wealth unlawfully hoarded, and following impious vows, viz., associatedwith the vows prohibited in the Sastras; they do actions 'that are full of ostentation, pride and arrogance.'  
507 अद्य श्वो वा मुमूर्षवः चिन्ताम् अपरिमेयां च अपरिच्छेद्यां प्रलयान्तां प्राकृतप्रलयावधिकाल-साध्यविषयाम् उपश्रिताः । तथा कामोपभोगपरमाः कामोपभोग एव परमपुरुषार्थः, इति मन्वानाः । एतावद् इति निश्चिताः, इतः अधिकः पुरुषार्थो न विद्यते इति संजातनिश्चयाः । 11 । Those who are sure to die today or tomorrow 'obsess themselves with cares' in regard to objects the attainment of which is not possible even by the time of death. Likewise, they look upon 'enjoyment of desires' as their highest aim, viz., they regard the satisfaction of sensual enjoyments as the highest aim of human life. They are convinced that this is all, viz.,they are assured that there is no value in human life greater than this.  
508 आशापाशशतैः आशाख्यपाशशतैः बद्धाः कामक्रोधपरायणाः कामक्रोधैकनिष्ठाः । कामभोगार्थम् अन्यायेन अर्थसंचयान् प्रति ईहन्ते । 12 । They are 'bound by hundreds of fetters of hope,' viz., bound by hundreds of fetters in the form of hope. They are given over to 'desire and anger' viz., they are intent solely on desire and anger, To satisfy their sensual desires, they endeavour for wealth through immoral means.  
509 इदं क्षेत्रपुत्रादिकं सर्वं मया मत्सामर्थ्येन एव लब्धम्, न अदृष्टादिना, इमं च मनोरथम् अहम् एव प्राप्स्ये, न अदृष्टादिसहितः, इदं धनं मत्सामर्थ्येन लब्धं मे अस्ति, इदम् अपि पुनः मे मत्सामर्थ्येन एव भविष्यति । 13 । This land, sons etc., have I gained solely by my ability and not by the help of any higher force. I shall attain this desire also by myself and not by good fortune or any other means. This wealth, gained solely by my ability, is with me. And this also shall be mine through my own ability.  
510 असौ मया बलवता हतः शत्रुः । अपरात् अपि शत्रून् अहं शूरो धीरः च हनिष्ये । किमत्र मन्दधीभिः दुर्बलैः परिकल्पितेन अदृष्टादिपरिकरेण? तथा च ईश्वरः अहं स्वाधीनः अहम् अन्येषां च अहम् एव नियन्ता । अहं भोगी स्वत एव अहं भोगी, न अदृष्टादिभिः । सिद्धः अहम् - स्वतः अहम् न कस्माच्चिद् अदृष्टादेः । तथा स्वत एव बलयान् स्वत एव सुखी । 14 । This enemy has been slain by me, powerful as I am. I shall slay other enemies also - I who am heroic and valiant. What is the use of the conception of destiny, which is only an imagination of weak people of little understanding? Similarly:I am 'the lord', viz., I am independent, and I am also the ruler of others. I am the 'enjoyer,' viz., I am the enjoyer through my own powers, and not through good fortune etc. I am 'successful,' viz., I am successful by myself and not through any destiny etc. Likewise, I am strong and happyby myself.  
511 अहं स्वतः च आढ्यः अस्मि, अभिजनवान् अस्मि, स्वत एव उत्तमकुले प्रसूतः अस्मि । अस्मिन् लोके मया सदृशः कः अन्यः स्वसामर्थ्यलब्धसर्वविभवो विद्यते? अहं स्वयम् एव यक्ष्ये, दास्यामि, मोदिष्ये इति अज्ञानविमोहिताः ईश्वरानुग्रहनिरपेक्षेण स्वेन एव यागदानादिकं कर्तुं शक्यम् इति अज्ञानविमोहिता मन्यन्ते । 15 । 'I am rich by myself. Who else is there in this world like me gaining all glory with his own ability? I myself shall sacrifice, I shall give alms and I shall rejoice' - thus they think deluded by ignorance, viz., deluded by ignorance that they are themselves capable of offering sacrifices, gifts etc., unaided by the grace of God.  
512 अदृष्टेश्वरादिसहकारम् ऋते स्वेन एव सर्वं कर्तुं शक्यम् इति कृत्वा एवं कुर्याम् एतत् च कुर्याम् अन्यत् च कुर्याम् इति अनेकचित्तविभ्रान्ताः - अनेकचित्ततया विभ्रान्ताः, एवंरूपेण मोहजालेन समावृताः, कामभोगेषु प्रकर्षेण सक्ताः, मध्ये मृताः अशुचौ नरके पतन्ति । 16 । As they do not accept the need for the help of past Karma and the Lord for their achievements and believe them to be only due to their own efforts, they are 'bewildered' by many thoughts, 'Thus I shall do, this I shall accomplish, and still another I shall achieve'. In this way they are ensnared by the net of delusion. Highly addicted to sensual enjoyments, they die in the middle of such enjoyments and fall into foul Naraka [Naraka is sometimes translated as hell. This is the Christian conception.In the Hindu view, it is purgatory where through intense sufferings the Jiva is purged of sins].  
513 आत्मसम्भाविताः आत्मना एव सम्भाविताः आत्मना एव आत्मानं सम्भावयन्ति इत्यर्थः । स्तब्धाः परिपूर्णं मन्यमाना न किञ्चित्कुर्वाणाः, कथम्? धनमानमदान्विताः - धनेन विद्याभिजनाभिमानेन च जनितमदान्विताः, नामयज्ञैः नामप्रयोजनैः यष्टा इति नाममात्रप्रयोजनैः यज्ञैः यजन्ते, तत् अपि दम्भेन हेतुना यष्टृत्वख्यापनाय, अविधिपूर्वकम् अयथाचोदनं यजन्ते । 17 । They are held in 'high esteem by themselves'; the meaning is they are full of the sense of self-esteem. They feel self-sufficient, viz., regarding themselves as perfect, they do nothing. How? They are 'possessed of the intoxication of wealth and pride,' viz., they are intoxicated hy wealth andpride of wealth, learning and descent. They perform 'sacrifices in name only,' viz., they perform sacrifices for the fame of it, the purpose being gaining fame as the performers of sacrifice. These are performed for ostentation actuated with the motive of becoming famous as the performers of sacrifices and not in accordance with the proper rules of the Sastras, viz., without regard to any commandment.  
514 ते च ईदृग्भूता यजन्ते इत्याह -अनन्यापेक्षः अहम् एव सर्वं करोमि इति एवंरूपम् अहङ्कारम् आश्रिताः, तथा सर्वस्य करणे मद्बलम् एव पर्याप्तम् इति च बलम्, अतो 'मत्सदृशो न कश्चिद् अस्ति' इति च दर्पम्, 'एवंभूतस्य मम काममात्रेण सर्वं संपत्स्यते' इति कामम्, मम ये अनिष्टकारिणः तान् सर्वान् हनिष्यामि' इति च क्रोधम्, एवम् एतान् संश्रिताः स्वदेहेषु परदेहेषु च अवस्थितं सर्वस्य कारयितारं पुरुषोत्तमं माम् अभ्यसूयकाः प्रद्विषन्तः कुयुक्तिभिः मत्स्थितौ दोषम् आविष्कुर्वन्तो माम् असहमानाः, अहङ्कारादिकान् संश्रिताः, यागादिकं सर्वं क्रियाजातं कुर्वते इत्यर्थः । 18 । Sri Krshna says that they perform sacrifices in the following manner:They depend on their egoism in the form of 'I can do everything without the help of anyone'; likewise, in performing everything they depend on their power, 'My power is sufficient'; hence pride takes the following form, 'There is nobody like myself. Desire takes the form of, 'Because I am so, everything is fulfilled by my mere desire'. 'Wrath' consists in conceiving, 'I shall slay those who cause evil to me'. Thus, depending on themselves, they evince malice towards Me, the Supreme Person abiding in their own bodies as well as in the bodies of others; and they hate Me. They endeavour to invent fallacious arguments against Myexistence, and being unable to tolerate Me, they perform all acts like sacrifices etc., depending only on their egoism.  
515 य एवं मां द्विषन्ति तान् क्रूरान् नराधमान् अशुभान् अहम् अजस्रं संसारेषु जन्मजरामरणादिरूपेण परिवर्तमानेषु संतानेषु, तत्र अपि आसुरीषु एव योनिषु क्षिपामि । मदानुकूल्यप्रत्यनीकेषु एव जन्मसु क्षिपामि । तत्तज्जन्मप्राप्त्यनुगुणप्रवृत्तिहेतुभूतबुद्धिषु क्रूरासु अहम् एव संयोजयामि इत्यर्थः । 19 । Those who hate Me in this manner, I hurl them, the cruel, inauspicious and the vilest of mankind into the cycle of births and deaths for ever, viz., old age, death etc., revolving again and again, and even there into demoniac wombs. I hurl them into births, antagonistic to any friendlinesstowards Me. The meaning is that I shall connect them to cruel minds as would impel them to actions which lead them to the attainment of cursedbirths.  
516 मदानुकूल्यप्रत्यनीकजन्मापन्नाः पुनः अपि जन्मनि जन्मनि मूढा मद्विपरीतज्ञानाः माम् अप्राप्य एव 'अस्ति भगवान् वासुदेवः सर्वेश्वरः' इति ज्ञानम् अप्राप्य ततः ततो जन्मनः अधमाम् एव गतिं यान्ति । 20 । 'These deluded men,' viz., those entertaining perverse knowledge about Me, attain repeatedly births that tend them to be antagonistic to Me. Never 'attaining Me', viz., never arriving at the knowledge that Vasudeva. the Lord and the ruler of all, truly exists, they go farther and farther down, from that birth, to the lowest level.  
517 अस्य आसुरस्वभावस्य आत्मनाशस्य मूलहेतुम् आह -अस्य असुरस्वभावरूपस्य नरकस्य एतत् त्रिविधं द्वारम् तत् च आत्मनो नाशनम्, काम, क्रोधः लोभ इति । त्रयाणां स्वरूपं पूर्वम् एव व्याख्यातम् । द्वारं मार्गो हेतुः इत्यर्थः । तस्मात् एतत् त्रयं त्यजेत् । तस्माद् अतिघोरनरकहेतुत्वात् कामक्रोधलोभानाम् एतत् त्रितयं दूरतः परित्यजेत् । 21 । Sri Krshna proceeds to explain the root-cause of the ruin to the self of demoniac nature :Those three which constitute the 'gateway of this hell' in the shape of demoniac nature, and are destructive of the self (Atman) - are known as desire, wrath and greed. The nature of these has already been explained. 'Gateway' (Dvara) means the path, the cause. Therefore, one shouldrenounce these three. Therefore, since they constitute the cause of the extremely dreadful Naraka, one should wholly renounce this triad - desire, wrath and greed.  
518 एतैः कामक्रोधलोभैः तमोद्वारैः मद्विपरीतज्ञानहेतुभिः विमुक्तः नर आत्मनः श्रेय आचरति । लब्धमद्विषयज्ञानो मदानुकूल्ये प्रवर्तते, ततो माम् एव परां गतिं याति । 22 ।  One who has been 'released from these three' - from desire, wrath and greed which constitute the gates of darkness causing erroneous knowledge of Myself - he works for the good of the self. Gaining knowledge of Myself, he endeavours to be inclined towards Me. From there, he attains the supreme goal, which is Myself.  
519 शास्त्रानादरः अस्य नरकस्य प्रधानहेतुः इति आह -शास्त्रं वेदाः विधिः अनुशासनम् वेदाख्यं मदनुशासनम् उत्सृज्य यः कामकारतो वर्तते स्वच्छन्दानुगुणमार्गेण वर्तते, न स सिद्धिम् अवाप्नोति, न काम् अपि आमुष्मिकीं सिद्धिम् अवाप्नोति । न सुखं एहिकम् अपि किचिद् अवाप्नोति । न परां गतिम्, कुतः परां गतिं प्राप्नोति इत्यर्थः । 23 । Sri Krshna now teaches that the main cause of this kind of degeneration is lack of reverence for the Sastras:Here Sastra means Vedas. Vidhi stands for injunction. He who abandonsMy injunction called Vedas and acts under the influence of desire, viz., takes the path according to his own wishes, does not attain perfection, He does not reach any Siddhi in the next world, nor does he find theslightest happiness in this world, let alone the attainment of the supreme state. It is not possible for him to do so. Such is the meaning.  
520 तस्मात् कार्यकार्यव्यवस्थितौ उपादेयानुपादेयव्यवस्थायां शास्त्रम् एव तव प्रमाणम् । धर्मशास्त्रेतिहासपुराणाद्युपबृंहिता वेदा यद् एव पुरुषोत्तमाख्यं परं तत्त्वं तत्प्रीणनरूपं तत्प्राप्त्युपायभूतं च कर्म अवबोधयन्ति, तत् शास्त्रविधानोक्तं तत्त्वं कर्म च ज्ञात्वा यथावद् अन्यूनातिरिक्तं विज्ञाय कर्तुं त्वम् अर्हसि तद् एव उपादातुम् अर्हसि । 24 । Hence, the Sastra is to be the only authority for you in determining what should be done and what should not be done, viz., in deciding what ought to be accepted and what ought not be accepted. You should know, i.e., understand, neither more nor less than what constitutes the truth andthe work enjoined in the injunctions of the Sastras which the Highest Reality called the Supreme Person revealed in the Vedas. The Vedic injunctions are supplemented by the Dharma-sastras, the Itihasas and the Puranas. The acts enjoined by them are the means for reaching Him and for pleasing Him. You should perform them; you should accept them alone.  
