वद्रामानुजमुनिविरचिते श्रीमद्भगवद्गीताभाष्ये प्रथमोऽध्यायः 
यत्पदाम्भोरुहध्यानविध्वस्ताशेषकल्मषः । वस्तुतामुपयातोऽहं यामुनेयं नमामि तम् ।। 
हरिः ॐ श्रियः पतिः निखिलहेयप्रत्यनीककल्याणैकतानः, स्वेतरसमस्तवस्तुविलक्षणानन्तज्ञानानन्दैकस्वरूपः, स्वाभाविकानवधिकातिशयज्ञानबलैश्वर्यवीर्यशक्तितेजः प्रभृत्यसंख्येयकल्याणगुणगणमहोदधिः, स्वाभिमतानुरूपैकरूपाचिन्त्यदिव्याद्भुतनित्यनिवद्यनिरतिशयौज्ज्वल्यसौगन्ध्यसौन्दर्यसौकुमार्य-लावण्ययौवनाद्यनन्तगुणनिधिदिव्यरूपः, स्वोचितविविधविचित्रानन्ताश्चर्यनित्यनिरवद्यापरिमित-दिव्यभूषणः, स्वानुरूपासंख्येयाचिन्त्यशक्तिनित्यनिरवद्यनिरतिशयकल्याणदिव्यायुधः, स्वाभिमतानुरूपनित्यनिरवद्यस्वरूपरूपगुणविभवैश्वर्यशीलाद्यनवधिकातिशयासंख्येय-कल्याणगुणश्रीवल्लभः, स्वसंकल्पानुविधायिस्वरूपस्थितिप्रवृत्तिभेदाशेषशेषतैकरतिरूपनित्य-निरवद्यनिरतिशयज्ञानक्रियैश्वर्याद्यनन्तगुणगणापरिमितसूरिभिः अनवरताभिष्टुतचरणयुगलः, वाङ्नसापरिच्छेद्यस्वरूपस्वभावः, स्वोचितविविधविचित्रानन्तभोग्यभोगोपकरणभोगस्थान-समृद्धानन्ताश्चर्यानन्तमहाविभवानन्तपरिमाणनित्यनिरवद्याक्षरपरमव्योमनिलयः, विविधविचित्रानन्तभोग्यभोक्तृवर्गपरिपूर्णनिखिलजगदुदयविभवलयलीलः, परं ब्रह्म पुरुषोत्तमो नारायणो ब्रह्मादिस्थावरान्तम् अखिलं जगत् सृष्ट्वा स्वेन रूपेण अवस्थितः, ब्रह्मादिदेवमनुष्याणां ध्यानाराधनाद्यगोचरः अपि अपारकारुण्यसौशील्यवात्सल्यौदार्यमहोदधिः, स्वमेव रूपं तत्तत्सजातीयसंस्थानं स्वस्वभावम् अजहद् एव कुर्वन् तेषु तेषु लोकेषु अवतीर्य अवतीर्य तैः तैः आराधितः, तत्तदिष्टानुरूपं धर्मार्थकाममोक्षाख्यं फलं प्रयच्छन्, भूभारावतारणापदेशेन अस्मदादीनाम् अपि समाश्रयणीयत्वाय अवतीर्य उर्व्यां सकलमनुजनयनविषयतां गतः, परावरनिखिलजनमनोनयनहारिदिव्यचेष्टितानि कुर्वन्, पूतनाशकटयमलार्जुनारिष्टप्रलम्बधेनुककालियकेशिकुवलयापीडचाणूरमुष्टिकतोसलकंसादीन् निहत्य अनवधिकदयासौहार्दानुरागगर्भावलोकनालापामृतैः विश्वम् आप्याययन् निरतिशयसौन्दर्यसौशील्यादिगुणगणाविष्कारेण अक्रूरमालाकारादीन् परमभागवतान् कृत्वा पाण्डुतनययुद्धप्रोत्साहनव्याजेन परमपुरुषार्थलक्षणमोक्षसाधनतया वेदान्तोदितं स्वविषयं ज्ञानकर्मानुगृहीतं भक्तियोगम् अवतारयामास । तत्र पाण्डवानां कुरूणां च युद्धे प्रारब्धे स भगवान् पुरुषात्तमः सर्वेश्वरेश्वरो जगदुपकृतिमर्त्य आश्रितवात्सल्यविवशः पार्थं रथिनम् आत्मानं च सारथिं सर्वलोकसाक्षिकं चकार । एवम् अर्जुनस्य उत्कर्षं ज्ञात्वा अपि सर्वात्मना अन्धो धृतराष्ट्रः सुयोधनविजयबुभुत्सया संजयं पप्रच्छ । 
Arjuna's Spiritual Conversion through Sorrow

I offer my salutation to Yamunacarya by meditation on
whose (holy) feet I have all my blemishes destroyed and
attained to the status of (authentic) existence.

THE ADVENT OF THE GITA
He (Narayana) is the Consort of Sri; He is wholly auspicious
and is antagonistic to all that is evil; His essential nature
consists purely of infinitude, knowledge and bliss,
and thereby He stands distinguished by His superiority to
all other entities. He is the great ocean of countless auspicious
attributes which are both inherent in Him and beyond
all limitations in excellence - some of them being knowledge,
power, lordship, energy, potency and splendour; He
has a divine form, which is both agreeable and worthy of
Him - inconceivably divine, wondrous, eternal and flaw
less, 
a treasure-house of limitless perfections such as
radiance, beauty, fragrance, tenderness, pervading sweetness
and youthfulness. He is adorned with divine ornaments
which are worthy of Him, manifold, variegated, infinite
wondrous, eternal, flawless, unlimited and divine; He
is equipped with divine weapons which are appropriate to
Him, countless, of wondrous powers, eternal, impeccable
and surpassingly auspicious.

He is the Beloved of Sri, whose eternal and impeccable
nature, attributes, glory, sovereignty and virtues, unsurpasssed
and countless, are all agreeable and worthy of Him; His feet are
incessantly praised by countless numbers of perfected devotees (Suris) 
whose nature, existence and activities are in accordance with His 
will and whose countless qualities such as knowledge, action and 
glory are eternal, impeccable and unsurpassed, all functioning joyously,
in complete subservience to Him.

His nature and qualities transcend all thought and words.
He dwells in the divine and imperishable supreme Heaven
which abounds in manifold, wondrous and countless
objects, means and places of enjoyment. It is an abode
appropriate to Him and is infinite in its wondrous glory and
magnitude. His sportive delight brings about the origination,
sustentation and dissolution of the entire cosmos filled with
multifarious, variegated and innumerable objects and subjects
of mundane existence.
Such is He, the Supreme Brahman, the Supreme Person,
Narayana.
After creating the entire world, beginning from Brahma
down to immobile things, He - being inaccessible in His
transcendent form to the meditation and worship of all
creatures from Brahma down to gods, men etc. , and being
also a shoreless ocean of compassion and loving condescension,
paternal affection and generosity - He shaped His
own figure into the likeness of the various kinds of creatures
without giving up His own supreme nature, and got incarnated 
in the worlds of creatures and received their worship and 
granted them their lives' fulfilments comprising Dharma, Artha, 
Kama and Moksha, in accordance with, their desire.

Under the pretext of relieving the earth of its burdens but
really in order to make Himself available for us (men) to
take refuge in Him, He incarnated on the earth as Sri
Krshna. He thus became the visible object for the sight of all
men, and did divine actions that captivated the minds and
eyes of all, high and low. He vanquished demoniac persons
such as Putana, Sakata, the two Arjuna trees, Arishta,
Pralambha, Dhenuka, Kaliya, Kesin, Kuvalayapida, Chanura,
Mushtika, Tosala and Kamsa. He spread soothing happiness
over the entire world with the ambrosia of His glances and speech, 
conveying His boundless compassion, friendliness and love.

He made Akrura, Malakara and others the most ardent
-devotees by the manifestation of His unsurpassed qualities
such as beauty and loving compassion.
With the ostensible intention of imparting to the sons of
Pandu the fighting spirit, he brought about the descent of
the Yoga of Bhakti directed to Himself, promoted with the
aid of Jnana and Karma-the Yoga which has been promulgated
by the Vedanta as the pathway to the supreme goal of release.
When the war between Pandavas ( or the sons of Pandu )
and the descendants of Kuru broke out, He, the Lord, the
Supreme Person, the Lord of all gods, who had taken upon
Himself a mortal human form for helping the world, 
overwhelmed by His love for those devotees who have taken
refuge in Him- that Supreme Person made Arjuna the
master of the chariot and Himself the charioteer, so that He
could he seen by all the people. Even knowing that Krshna
was the Supreme Being, Dhrutarashtra, who was blind in
every way, wanted to hear about the victory of his son
Suyodhana (Duryodhana) and questioned Sanjaya thus:

  
001 दुर्योधनः स्वयमेव भीमाभिरक्षितं पाण्डवानां बलम् आत्मीयं च भीष्माभिरक्षितं बलम् अवलोक्य आत्मविजये तस्य बलस्य पर्याप्तताम् आत्मीयस्य तद्विजये चापर्याप्तताम् आचार्याय निवेद्य अन्तरे विषण्णः अभवत् । तस्य विषादम् आलोक्य भीष्मः तस्य हर्षं जनयितुं सिंहनादं शङ्खाध्मानं च कृत्वा शङ्खभेरीनिनादैः च विजयाभिशंसिनं घोषं च अकारयत् । ततः तं घोषम् आकर्ण्य सर्वेश्वरेश्वरः पार्थसारथी रथी च पाण्डुतनयः त्रैलोक्यविजयोपकरणभूते महति स्यन्दने स्थितौ त्रैलोक्यं कम्पयन्तौ श्रीमत्पाञ्चजन्यदेवदत्तौ दिव्यौ शङ्खौ प्रदध्मतुः । ततो युधिष्ठिरवृकोदरादयः च स्वकीयान् शङ्खान् पृथक् पृथक् प्रदध्मुः । स घोषो दुर्योधनप्रमुखानां सर्वेषाम् एव भवत्पुत्राणां हृदयानि बिभेद । अद्य एव नष्टं कुरूणां बलम् इति धार्त्तराष्ट्रा मेनिरे । एवं तद्विजयाभिकाङ्क्षिणे धृतराष्ट्राय संजयः अकथयत् । 1-19 । Duryodhana, after viewing the forces of pandavas protected 
by Bhima, and his own forces protected by Bhishma
conveyed his views thus to Drona, his teacher, about the
adequacy of Bhima's forces for conquering the Kaurava
forces and the inadequacy of his own forces for victory against
the Pandava forces. He was grief-stricken within.

Observing his (Duryodhana's) despondency, Bhishma, in
order to cheer him, roared like a lion, and then blowing his
conch, made his side sound their conchs and kettle-drums,
which made an uproar as a sign of victory. Then, having
heard that great tumult, Arjuna and Sri Krshna the Lord of
all lords, who was acting as the charioteer of Arjuna, sitting
in their great chariot which was powerful enough to conquer
the three worlds; blew their divine conchs Srimad
Pancajanya and Devadatta. Then, both Yudhisthira and
Bhima blew their respective conchs separately. That tumult
rent asunder the hearts of your sons, led by Duryodhana.
The sons of Dhrtarashtra then thought, 'Our cause is almost
lost now itself. ' So said Sanjaya to Dhrtarashtra who was
longing for their victory.
  
002 अथ युयुत्सून् अवस्थितान् धार्तराष्ट्रान् भीष्मद्रोणप्रमुखान् दृष्ट्वा लङ्कादहनवानरध्वजः पाण्डुतनयो ज्ञानशक्तिबलैश्वर्यवीर्यतेजसां निधिं स्वसंकल्पकृतजगदुदयविभवलयलीलं हृषीकेशं परावरनिखिलजनान्तर्बाह्यसर्वकरणानां सर्वप्रकारकनियमने अवस्थितं समाश्रितवात्सल्यविवशतया स्वसारथ्ये अवस्थितं युयुत्सून् यथावद् अवेक्षितुं तदीक्षणक्षमे स्थाने रथं स्थापय इति अचोदयत् । स च तेन चोदितः तत्क्षणाद् एव भीष्मद्रोणादीनां सर्वेषाम् एव महीक्षितां पश्यतां यथाचोदितम् अकरोत् । ईदृशी भवदीयानां विजयस्थितिः इति च अवोचत् । 20-25 । Sanjaya said to Dhrtarashtra: Then, seeing the Kauravas, 
who were ready for battle, Arjuna, who had, Hanuman, 
noted for his exploit of burning Lanka, as the emblem on his flag 
on his chariot, directed his charioteer Sri Krshna, the Supreme Lord-
who is overcome by parental love for those who take shelter 
in Him who is the treasure-house of knowledge, power, lordship, 
energy, potency and splendour, whose sportive delight 
brings about the origin, sustentation and dissolution of the 
entire cosmos at His will, who is the Lord of the senses, 
who controls in all ways the senses inner and outer of all, 
superior and inferior - by saying, 
'Station my chariot in an appropriate place in order
that I may see exactly my enemies who are eager for battle.'

Thus, directed by him, Sri Krshna did immediately as He
had been directed, while Bhishma, Drona and others and all
the kings were looking on. Such is the prospect of victory
for your men.  
003 स तु पार्थो महामनाः परमकारुणिको दीर्घबन्धुः परमधार्मिकः सभ्रातृको भवद्भिः अतिघोरैः मारणैः जतुगृहादिभिः असकृद् वञ्चितः अपि परमपुरुषसहायः अपि हनिष्यमाणान् भवदीयान् विलोक्य बन्धुस्नेहेन परमया च कृपया धर्माधर्मभयेन च अतिमात्रस्विन्नसर्वगात्रः सर्वथा अहं न योत्स्यामि इति उक्त्वा बन्धुविश्लेषजनितशोकसंविग्नमानसः सशरं चापं विसृज्य रथोपस्थे उपाविशत् । 26-47 । Sanjaya continued: The high-minded Arjuna; 
extremely kind, deeply friendly, and supremely righteous, 
having brothers like himself, though repeatedly deceived by the
treacherous attempts of your people like burning in the
lac-house etc. , and therefore fit to be killed by him with the
help of the Supreme Person, nevertheless said, 'I will not 
fight'.
He felt weak, overcome as he was by his love and
extreme compassion for his relatives. He was also filled
with fear, not knowing what was righteous and what
unrighteous. His mind was tortured by grief, because of the
thought of future separation from his relations. So he threw 
away his bow and arrow and sat on the chariot as if to fast to death.  
