01 स्वधर्मज्ञानवैराग्यसाध्यभक्त्येकगोचरः । नारायणः परं ब्रह्म गीताशास्त्रे समीरितः ।। 1 ।।
 In the Scripture known as the Bhagavad Gita, Narayana,  the Supreme Brahman is declared. 
He is attainable by  Bhakti alone, which is to be brought about by the observance of one's own 
Dharma, acquisition of knowledge and renunciation of attachment.

02 ज्ञानकर्मात्मिके निष्ठे योगलक्ष्ये सुसंस्कृते । आत्मानुभूतिसिद्ध्यर्थे पूर्वषट्केन चोदिते ।। 2 ।।
 In the first hexad, the performance of desireless Karma and Jnana, with the practice of 
Yoga in view, is enjoined  for the realisation of the self.

03 मध्यमे भगवत्तत्त्वयाथात्म्यावाप्तिसिद्धये । ज्ञानकर्माभिनिर्वर्त्यो भक्तियोगः प्रकीर्तितः ।। 3 ।।
 In the middle hexad, Bhakti Yoga, which can be brought about  by Karma and Jnana 
is treated for the attainment of the exact knowledge of Bhagavan, the Supreme Being, as He is.

04 प्रधानपुरुषव्यक्तसर्वेश्वरविवेचनम् । कर्मधीर्भक्तिरित्यादिः पूर्वशेषोऽन्तिमोदितः ।। 4 ।।
 In the last hexad, which subserves the two preceding hexads, is treated, matter (Pradhana) 
in the primordial condition, matter in its evolved state, the self (Purusa) and Isvara the Ruler of all. 
Besides, the disciplines relating to work, to knowledge and to devotion are again dealt with 
by way of supplementing and completing what has been taught earlier.

05 अस्थानस्नेहकारुण्यधर्माधर्मधियाकुलम् । पार्थं प्रपन्नमुद्दिश्य शास्त्रावतरणं कृतम् ।। 5 ।।
 The treatise was initiated for the sake of Arjuna, who was overtaken  by misplaced 
love and compassion and also perplexity as to what was Dharma and what Adharma, 
and who took refuge in Sri Krishna.

06 नित्यात्मासङ्गकर्मेहागोचरा साङ्ख्ययोगधीः । द्वितीये स्थितधीलक्षा प्रोक्ता तन्मोहशान्तये ।। 6 ।।
 The knowledge of Sankhya and Yoga, which comprehend in their scope the eternal self 
and disinterested activity respectively,  leading to the state of steady wisdom, is taught in
the second chapter for removing Arjuna's delusion.

07 असक्त्या लोकरक्षायौ गुणेष्वारोप्य कर्तृताम् । सर्वेश्वरे वा न्यस्योक्ता तृतीये कर्मकार्यता ।। 7 ।।
 In the third chapter is taught the need for the performance of works without attachment to 
any fruits other than the pleasure of the Lord and for the protection of the world, ascribing 
the agency to the Guna-s or placing it in the Lord of all.

08  प्रसङ्गात्स्वस्वभावोक्तिः कर्मणोऽकर्मतास्य च ।  भेदा ज्ञानस्य माहात्म्यं चतुर्थाध्याय उच्यते ।। 8 ।।
 In the fourth chapter, the following matters are treated: His nature is explained by the way. 
Next it is taught that Karma Yoga  has an aspect other than action, i.e., knowledge-aspect.
The varieties of Karma Yoga and the eminence of knowledge in it are emphasised.

09 कर्मयोगस्य सौकर्यं शैघ्र्यं काश्चन तद्विधाः । ब्रह्मज्ञानप्रकारश्च पञ्चमाध्याय उच्यते ।। 9 ।।
 In the fifth chapter are set forth the ease and quick efficacy of Karma Yoga, some of its 
elements and the mode of knowledge of Brahman, i.e., the individual self.

10 योगाभ्यासविधिर्योगी चतुर्धा योगसाधनम् । योगसिद्धिः स्वयोगस्य पारम्यं षष्ठ उच्यते ।। 10 ।।
 In the sixth chapter are taught the practice of Yoga (concentration and meditation), the 
four-fold divisions of (successful) Yogin-s, the means to success in Yoga, and the 
supermacy of Yoga concerning Himself.

11 स्वयाथात्म्यं प्रकृत्यास्य तिरोधिः शरणागतिः । भक्तभेदः प्रबुद्धस्य श्रैष्ठ्यं सप्तम उच्यते ।। 11 ।।
 In the seventh chapter is taught the exact knowledge of Himself, His concealment by the 
Prakrti, the surrender to Him as the means to  overcome this, observation on various 
types of devotees and the superiority of the man of wisdom among these devotees.

12 ऐश्वर्याक्षरयाथात्म्यभगवच्चरणार्थिनाम् । वेद्योपादेयभावानामष्टमे भेद उच्यते ।। 12 ।।
 In the eigth chapter are discussed the distinction of what are to be understood and 
acquired by each of the three classes of devotees - those who are after prosperity, 
after the true nature of the self and after the feet of the Lord.

13 स्वमाहात्म्यं मनुष्यत्वे परत्वं च महात्मनाम् । विशेषो नवमे योगो भक्तिरूपः प्रकीर्तितः ।। 13 ।।
 In the ninth chapter are treated His own eminenece, His undiminished supermacy as 
the Divine even when He assumes embodiments as Incarnations the excellence of 
Mahatma-s or devotees who seek God alone, and the discipline of Bhakti or devotion to God.

14 स्वकल्याणगुणानन्त्यकृत्स्नस्वाधीनतामतिः ।  भक्त्युत्पत्तिविवृद्ध्यर्था विस्तीर्णा दशमोदिता ।। 14 ।।
 In the tenth chapter are described in detail, the infinite auspicious  attributes of the 
Lord and His absolute control over everything, so as  to generate and develop Bhakti 
or Devotion to God in the minds of  aspirants.

15 एकादशे स्वयाथात्म्यसाक्षात्कारावलोकनम् । दत्तमुक्तं विदिप्राप्त्योर्भक्त्येकोपायता तथा ।। 15 ।।
 In the eleventh chapter, it is stated that the divine eye which can  give an immediate vision 
of Him as He is, was given to Arjuna, and   accordingly it is stated that bhakti is the only 
means of knowing and attaining Him in the way described.

16 भक्तेः श्रैष्ठ्यमुपायोक्तिः अशक्तस्यात्मनिष्ठता । तत्प्रकारास्त्वतिप्रीतिः भक्ते - द्वादश उच्यते ।। 16 ।।
 In the twelth chapter are taught the superiority of Bhakti Yoga,  the means thereto, the 
direction for the one unqualified to meditate  on the self, the details of the qualities to
be acquired and modes of  Sadhana to be practiced for that end, and immense love 
of the Lord for the devotees.


17 देहस्वरूपमात्माप्तिहेतुरात्मविशोधनम् । बन्धहेतुर्विवेकश्च त्रयोदश उदीर्यते ।। 17 ।।
 In the thirteenth chapter, the nature of the body, the means for the  realisation of the self, 
investigation of the nature of the self,  the cause of bondage and the discrimination between
the self and the  body are dealt with.

18 गुणबन्धविधा तेषां कर्तृत्वं तन्निवर्तनम् । गतित्रयस्वमूलत्वं चतुर्दश उदीर्यते ।। 18 ।।
 In the fourteenth chapter are explained the various ways in which the  Guna-s bind the self, 
how they are the agents in respect of all works  and how to eliminate their hold. It also 
explains how the Supreme Person  is the basis of all the three ends attainable, namely, 
heavenly  sovereignty, the abidance in the pristine state of the self and dwelling in the Lord.


19 अचिन्मिश्राद्विशुद्धाच्च चेतनात् पुरुषोत्तमः । व्यापनात् भरणात् स्वाम्यात् अन्यः पञ्चदशोदितः ।। 19 ।।
 In the fifteenth chapter, the Supreme person is declared to be other  than the self both in Its 
state of conjunction with non-conscient matter  and in Its state of pristine purity, because 
He pervades, sustains and  rules over them and the universe.

20 देवासुरविभागोक्तिपूर्विका शास्त्रवश्यता । तत्त्वानुष्ठानविज्ञानस्थेम्ने षोडश उच्यते ।। 20 ।।
 The sixteenth chapter deals first with the distinction between the divine and the demonic 
nature in order to establish what is truth and  what is right conduct, which can be attained 
by submission to Sastra-s.

21 अशास्त्रमासुरं कृत्स्नं शास्त्रीयं गुणतः पृथक् । लक्षणं शास्त्रसिद्धस्य त्रिधा सप्तदशोदितम् ।। 21 ।।
 In the seventeenth chapter, the following are dealt with: what are not  ordained by the 
Sastra-s and for that reason wholly demonic; what are  ordained in the Sastra-s and 
varied in accordance with the Guna-s; and the  characteristics of what are established 
in the Sastra-s as threefold in terms of 'Aum','Tat', 'Sat'.


22 ईश्वरे कर्तृताबुद्धिः सत्त्वोपादेयतान्तिमे । स्वकर्मपरिणामश्च शास्त्रसारार्थ उच्यते ।। 22 ।।
 The last chapter presents the mental state required for ascribing the agency to the Lord, 
the necessity of cultivating the Sattvic quality, the spiritual culmination of discharging one's 
duties and Bhakti Yoga  which forms the essence of the Gita Sastra.
 

23 कर्मयोगस्तपस्तीर्थदानयज्ञादिसेवनम् । ज्ञानयोगो जितस्वान्तैः परिशुद्धात्मनि स्थितिः ।। 23 ।।
 Karma Yoga is resorting to austerity, pilgrimage, charities, sacrifice and such other acts. 
Jnana Yoga is the abidance in the purified self by those who have controlled their minds.
24 भक्तियोगः परैकान्तप्रीत्या ध्यानादिषु स्थितिः । त्रयाणामपि योगानां त्रिभिरन्योन्यसङ्गमः ।। 24 ।।
 Bhakti Yoga is abidance in meditation and other forms of adoration with one-pointed 
love for the Supreme Being. The three Yoga-s are  interconnected.

25 नित्यनैमित्तिकानां च पराराधनरूपिणाम् । आत्मदृष्टेस्त्रयोऽप्येते योगद्वारेण साधकाः ।। 25 ।।
 The obligatory and occasional works are associated with all the three Yoga-s, as they 
are of the form of worship of the Supreme Being. All these Yoga-s serve as the means 
for the vision of the self through Yoga. But  Bhakti Yoga can be practiced even before 
gaining the vision of the self. The aspirants can repeat His name, sing hymns, visit 
holy places, even  with superficial love of the Lord.

26 निरत्सनिखिलाज्ञानो दृष्ट्वात्मानं परानुगम् । प्रतिलभ्य परां भक्तिं तयैवाप्नोति तत्पदम् ।। 26 ।।
 When one's nescience is removed and one perceives the self as subservient   to the 
Supreme, one attains supreme devotion and through it alone reaches  His realm. 
There is Vaidhi-bhakti or discipline-bound devotion, next  Para-bhakti (higher devotion 
of love) and then the final stage Parama bhakti  or pre-eminently supreme love.


27 भक्तियोगस्तदर्थी चेत्समग्रैश्वर्यसाधकः । आत्मार्थी चेत् त्रयोऽप्येते तत्कैवल्यस्य साधकाः ।। 27 ।।
 Bhakti Yoga helps to attain prosperity or comprehensive, sovereignty,  if one 
desires it. If one desires the self, all these three Yoga-s serve that  purpose, 
which consists in the attainment of pure Isolation (Kaivalya)

28 ऐकान्त्यं भगवत्येषां समानमधिकारिणाम् । यावत्प्राप्ति परार्थी चेत् तदेवात्यन्तमश्नुते ।। 28 ।।
 The attitude, that the Bhagavan is the ultimate end, is common to all  these types 
of the devotees. But if one aspires exclusively for the Lord overlooking the other 
two till such attainment, he attains Him completely.

29 ज्ञानी तु परमैकान्ती तदायत्तात्मजीवनः । तत्संश्लेषवियोगैकसुखदुःखस्तदेकधीः ।। 29 ।।
  The Jnani is one who is exclusively devoted to the Lord. His very  existence depends 
 on Him. Contact with Him is his only joy, separation   from him is his only grief. His 
 thought is focussed on Him alone.

30 भगवद्ध्यानयोगोक्तिवन्दनस्तुतिकीर्तनैः । लब्धात्मा तद्गतप्राणमनोबुद्धीन्द्रियक्रियः ।। 30 ।।
 When one has begun to find life's sole satisfaction in meditation on the  Lord, 
the vision of Him through such meditation, speaking about Him,   saluting Him, 
singing about Him and praising Him - then the operation  of the senses, intellect, 
mind and vital forces will get concentrated on Him.


31 निजकर्मादि भक्त्यन्तं कुर्यात् प्रीत्यैव कारितः । उपायतां परित्यज्य न्यस्येत् देवे तु तामभीः ।। 31 ।।
 Looking upon all disciplines from performance of duties to the practice of  Bhakti 
as meant only for pleasing the Lord and not with any extraneous   motive, one should 
abandon all dependence on any other means than Him (the supreme person), and 
remain without any fear of inadequacy of such  resignation in respect of his salvation.


32 एकान्तात्यन्तदास्यैकरतिः तत्पदमाप्नुयात् । तत्प्रधानमिदं शास्त्रमिति गीतार्थसङ्ग्रहः ।। 32 ।।
 Such a person finds his sole happiness in exclusive and continual service of God. 
He attains His realm. This work (Gita Sastra) is meant for such a devotee. Such is the 
summary of the meaning of the Gita.
