153 पञ्चमोऽध्यायःचतुर्थे अध्याये कर्मयोगस्य ज्ञानाकारतापूर्वकस्वरूपभेदो ज्ञानांशस्य च प्राधान्यम् उक्तम् ।ज्ञानयोगाधिकारिणः अपि कर्मयोगस्य अन्तर्गतात्मज्ञानत्वाद् अप्रमादत्वात् सुकरत्वात्निरपेक्षत्वाद् ज्यायस्त्वं तृतीये एव उक्तम् । इदानीं कर्मयोगस्य आत्मप्राप्तिसाधनत्वे ज्ञाननिष्ठायाः शैघ्र्यात् कर्मयोगान्तर्गताकर्तृत्वानुसन्धानप्रकारं च प्रतिपाद्य तन्मूलं ज्ञानं चपरिशोध्यते -अर्जुन उवाच कर्मणां सन्यासं ज्ञानयोगं पुनः कर्मयोगं च शंससि । एतद् उक्तं भवति - द्वितीये अध्याये 'मुमुक्षोः प्रथमं कर्मयोग एव कार्यः, कर्मयोगेन मृदितान्तःकरणकषायस्य ज्ञानयोगेन आत्मदर्शनं कार्यम्' इति प्रतिपाद्य, पुनः तृतीयचतुर्थयोः 'ज्ञानयोगाधिकारदशाम् आपन्नस्य अपि कर्मनिष्ठा एव ज्यायसी; सा एव ज्ञाननिष्ठानिरपेक्षा आत्मप्राप्त्येकसाधनम्' इति कर्मनिष्ठां प्रशंससि; इति । तत्र एतयोः ज्ञानकर्मयोगयोः आत्मप्राप्तिसाधनभावे यद् एकं सौकर्यात् शैघ्र्यात् च श्रेयः श्रेष्ठम् इति सुनिश्चितम् तत् मे ब्रूहि । 1 । Communion through RenunciationIn the fourth chapter, the knowledge form of Karma Yoga, its essential kinds and the importance of the element of knowledge in it have been discussed. In the third chapter itself, it has been told that even for one who is qualified for Jnana Yoga, Karma Yoga is better as it includes within itself the knowledge of the self. Besides, it is free from liability to lapses. It is therefore easy to follow. It is also independent of other means. Now, it is going to be told that Karma Yoga takes one in a much shorter time to the goal than Jnana Yoga when employed as a means for attaining the self. Then is described the way of meditationon the self as non-agent, which is incorporated in KarmaYoga. This knowledge rooted in Karma Yoga is then examined.Arjuna said:'You praise the renunciation of actions, i.e., JnanaYoga at one time, and next Karma Yoga'. This is what is objected to: In the second chapter, you have said that Karma Yoga alone should be practised first by an aspirant for release; and that the vision of the self should be achieved by means of Jnana Yoga by one whose mind has its blemishes washedaway by Karma Yoga. Again, in the third and fourth chapters, you have praised Karma Yoga or devotion to Karma as better than Jnana Yoga even for one who has attained the stage of Jnana Yoga, and that, as a means of attaining the self, it (Karma Yoga) is independent of Jnana Yoga.Therefore, of these two, Jnana Yoga and KarmaYoga - tell me precisely which by itself is superior, i.e., most excellent, being more easy to practise, and quicker to confer the vision of the self.  
154 श्रीभगवानुवाचसंन्यासः ज्ञानयोगः, कर्मयोगः च ज्ञानयोगशक्तस्य अपि उभौ निरपेक्षौ निःश्रेयसकरौ ।तयोः तु कर्मसंन्यासाद् ज्ञानयोगात् कर्मयोगः एव विशिष्यते । 2 । the Lord said :Even while granting that some persons are competent for the practice of Jnana Yoga exclusively, it has to be conceded that renunciation, i.e., Jnana Yoga, and Karma Yoga can be practised as independent of each other in the pursuit of the highest excellence. Still, of these two, KarmaYoga excels over the renunciation of actions, i.e., JnanaYoga.  
155 कुत इत्यत आह -यः कर्मयोगी तदन्तर्गतात्मानुभवतृप्तः तद्व्यतिरिक्तं किमपि न काङ्क्षति, तत एव किमपि न द्वेष्टि, तत एव द्वन्द्वसहः च; स नित्यसंन्यासी नित्यज्ञाननिष्ठः इति ज्ञेयः । स हि सुकरकर्मयोगनिष्ठतया सुखं बन्धात् प्रमुत्यते । 3 । Sri Krshna explains why this is so.That Karma Yogin, who, being satisfied with the experience of the self implied in Karma Yoga, does not desire anything different there from and consequently does not hate anything, and who, because of this, resignedly endures the pairs of opposites - he should be understood as ever given to renunciation, i.e., ever devoted to Jnana Yoga. Such a one therefore is freed from bondage because of his being firmly devoted to Karma Yoga which is easy to practise.  
156 ज्ञानयोगकर्मयोगयोः आत्मप्राप्तिसाधनभावे अन्योन्यनैरपेक्ष्यम् आह -ज्ञानयोगकर्मयोगौ फलभेदात् पृथग्भूतौ ये प्रवदन्ति ते बालाः अनिष्पन्नज्ञानाः, न पण्डिताः, न तु कृत्स्नविदः । कर्मयोगो ज्ञानयोगम् एव साधयति, ज्ञानयोगस्तु एक आत्मावलोकनं साधयति इति तयोः फलभेदेन पृथक्त्वं वदन्तो न पण्डिता इत्यर्थः ।उभयोः आत्मावलोकनैकफलयोः एकफलत्वेन एकम् अपि आस्थितः तद् एव फलं लभते । 4 । The independence of Jnana Yoga and Karma Yoga from each other as means for attainment of the self is now declared.Those who say that Karma Yoga and Jnana Yoga are distinct because of the difference in results, are children, i.e., are persons with incompleteknowledge; they do not know the entire truth. The meaning is that they do not possess true knowledge, who say that Karma Yoga results in JnanaYoga only and that Jnana Yoga alone results in the vision of the self, and that the two are thus distinct because of the difference in their fruits. But on the contrary as both have only the vision of the self as the fruit, a person who is firmly set in one of them, wins that one fruit common to both.  
157 एतद् एव विवृणोति -सांख्यैः ज्ञाननिष्ठैः यद् आत्मावलोकनरूपफलं प्राप्यते, तद् एव कर्मयोगनिष्ठैः अपि प्राप्यते ।एवम् एकफलत्वेन एकं वैकल्पिकं सांख्यं योगं च यः पश्यति, स पश्यति, स एव पण्डितःइत्यर्थः । 5 । Sri Krshna further expounds the same:The fruit in the form of the vision of the self which is attained by the Sankhyans (i.e.) Jnana Yogins, the same is attained alone by those who are Karma Yogins. He alone is wise who sees that Sankhya and Yoga are one and the same because of their having  the same result.  
158 इयान् विशेष इत्याह -संन्यासः ज्ञानयोगः तु अयोगतः कर्मयोगाद् ऋते प्राप्तुम् अशक्यः । योगयुक्तः कर्मयोगयुक्तःस्वयम् एव मुनिः आत्ममननशीलः सुखेन कर्मयोगं साधयित्वा न चिरेण एव अल्पकालेन एव ब्रह्म अधिगच्छति, आत्मानं प्राप्नोति । ज्ञानयोगयुक्तः तु महता दुःखेन ज्ञानयोगं साधयति;दुःखसाध्यत्वाद् दुःखप्राप्यत्वाद् आत्मानं चिरेण प्राप्नोति इत्यर्थः । 6 । Sri Krshna points out, if the aforesaid is the case, wherein the difference between them lies.Renunciation, i.e., Jnana Yoga, cannot be attained without Yoga, i.e.,Karma Yoga. A person following Karma Yoga, being himself a Muni, i.e., one enagaged in the contemplation of the self, after practising Karma Yoga reaches with ease the Brahman i.e., attains the self soon, i.e., in a short time. But one following Jnana Yoga by itself, completes Jnana Yoga with great difficulty only. On account of this great difficulty,he attains the self after a long period only.  
159 कर्मयोगयुक्तः तु शास्त्रीये परमपुरुषाराधनरूपे विशुद्धे कर्मणि वर्तमानः, तेन विशुद्धमनाःेविजितात्मा स्वाभ्यस्ते कर्मणि व्याप्तमनस्त्वेन सुखेन विजितमनाः तत एव जितेन्द्रियः; कर्तुःआत्मनो याथात्म्यानुसन्धाननिष्ठतया सर्वभूतात्मभूतात्मा ।सर्वेषां देवादिभूतानाम् आत्मभूत आत्मा यस्य असौ सर्वभूतात्मभूतात्मा; आत्मयाथात्म्यम्अनुसन्दधानस्य हि देवादिनां स्वस्य च एकाकार आत्मा; देवादिभेदानां प्रकृतिपरिणाम-विशेषरूपतया आत्माकारत्वासंभवात् ।प्रकृतिवियुक्तः सर्वत्र देवादिदेहेषु ज्ञानैकाकारतया समानाकार इति 'निर्दोंषं हि समं ब्रह्म' (गीता 5।19) इति अनन्तरमेव वक्ष्यते । स एवंभूतः कर्म कुर्वन् अपि अनात्मनि आत्माभिमानेन न लिप्यते न संबध्यते; अतः अचिरेण आत्मानम् आप्नोति इत्यर्थः । 7 ।  But a Karma Yogin remains engaged in the performance of pure actions prescribed by the Sastras, which are of the nature of propitiation of the Supreme Person. By this, he becomes purified in mind. He thus subdues his self, i.e., subdues his mind easily, because his mind is engaged in thevirtuous actions he has been performing before. Therefore his senses are subdued. His self is said to have become the self of all beings. Because of his being devoted to contemplation on the true nature of the self, he finds that his self is similar to the self of all beings like gods etc. One who contemplates on the true nature of the self understands that all selves are of the same form or nature. The distinctions obtaining among gods, men etc. , cannot pertain to the form of the self, because those distinctions are founded on particular modifications of Prakrti i.e., the bodies of beings. Sri Krshna will teach: 'For the Brahman (an individual self), when untainted, is the same everywhere' (5.19). The meaning of this is that when dissociated from the Prakrti, i.e., the body, the self is of the same nature everywhere, i.e., in the bodies of gods, men etc. It is of the same form of knowledge. The meaning is that one, who has become enlightened in this way, active though he be, is not tainted on account of erroneously conceiving what is other than the self (the body) as the self. He is not at all associated therewith. Therefore, he attains the self without any delay.  
160 यतः सौकर्यात् शैघ्र्याच्च कर्मयोग एव श्रेयान्, अतः तदपेक्षितं शृणु -एवम् आत्मतत्ववित् श्रोत्रादीनि ज्ञानेन्द्रियाणि वागादीनि कर्मेन्द्रियाणि प्राणाः च स्वस्यविषयेषु वर्तन्ते इति धारयन् अनुसन्दधानो न अहं किंचित् करोमि इति मन्येत । ज्ञानैकस्वभावस्य मम कर्ममूलेन्द्रियप्राणसम्बन्धकृतम् ईदृशं कर्तृत्वम्, न तु स्वरूपप्रयुक्तम्,इति मन्येत इत्यर्थः । 8-9 । As Karma Yoga is superior to Jnana Yoga because it is more easily pursued and is more rapidly efficacious in securing the fruits, listen to its requirement:Thus he who knows the truth concerning the self should reflect in mind that the ear and the other organs of sensation (Jnanendriyas) as also organs of action (Karmendriyas) and the vital currents (the Pranas) are occupied with their own respective objects. Thus he should know, 'I donot do anything at all'. He should reflect, 'My intrinsic nature is one of knowledge. The sense of agency comes because of the association of the self with the senses and the Pranas which are rooted in Karma. It does not spring from my essential nature'.  
161 ब्रह्मशब्देन प्रकृतिः इह उच्यते, 'मम योनिर्महद्ब्रह्म' (गीता 14।3) इति हि वक्ष्यते । इन्द्रियाणां प्रकृतिपरिणामविशेषरूपत्वेन इन्द्रियाकारेण अवस्थितायां प्रकृतौ 'पश्यन् श्रृण्वन्' इत्यादिना उक्तप्रकारेण कर्मणि आधाय फलसङ्गं त्यक्त्वा 'नैव किंचित् करोमि' इति यः कर्माणि करोति,स प्रकृतिसंसृष्टतया वर्तमानः अपि प्रकृत्यात्माभिमानरूपेण सम्बन्धहेतुना पापेन न लिप्यते,पद्मपत्रमिवाम्भसा - यथा पद्मपत्रम् अम्भसा संसृष्टम् अपि न लिप्यते, तथा न लिप्यतेइत्यर्थः । 10 । Here the term, Brahman denotes Prakrti: Later on Sri Krshna will say: 'The great Brahman is My womb' (14.3). Since Prakrti abides in the form of senses which are particular off-shoots of Prakrti, he who, as saidin the passage beginning with 'Even though he is seeing, hearing...' (5.8),understands that all actions proceed from Brahman (Prakrti), renounces all attachment while engaging himself in all actions, reflecting, 'I am doing nothing. ' Such a person, though existing in contact with Prakrti, is not contaminated by sin which is the result of the wrong identificationof the Atman with Prakrti and is the cause of bondage. Just as a lotus leaf is not wetted by water, actions do not affect or defile a person with sin, if he is free from such identification with the body.  
162 कायमनोबुद्धीन्द्रियसाध्यं कर्म स्वर्गादिफलसङ्गं त्यक्त्वा योगिनः आत्मविशुद्धये कुर्वन्ति,आत्मगतप्राचीनकर्मबन्धनविनाशाय कुर्वन्ति इत्यर्थः । 11 । Renouncing attachment to heaven etc., the Yogins perform actions accomplishable by the body, the mind and the intellect for the purification of themselves, i.e., for annulling the bonds of his previous Karma which have affected the self and which involve the self in Samsara.  
163 युक्तः आत्मव्यतिरिक्तफलेषु अचपलः आत्मैकप्रवणः कर्मफलं त्यक्त्वा केवलात्मशुद्धये कर्मानुष्ठाय नैष्ठिकीं शान्तिम् आप्नोति; स्थिराम् आत्मानुभवरूपां निर्वृतिम् आप्नोति । अयुक्तः आत्मव्यतिरिक्तफलेषु चपलः आत्मवलोकनविमुखः कामकारेण फले सक्तः कर्माणि कुर्वन् नित्यं कर्मभिः बध्यते नित्यसंसारी भवति । अतः फलसङ्गरहित इन्द्रियाकारेण परिणतायां प्रकृतौ कर्माणि संन्यस्य आत्मनो बन्धमोचनाय एव कर्माणि कुर्वीत इति उक्तं भवति । 12 । A Yogin is one who has no hankering for fruits other than the self, and who is exclusively devoted to the self. If a man renounces the fruits of actions and performs actions merely for the purification of himself, he attains lasting peace, i.e., he attains bliss which is of the form of lastingexperience of the self. The unsteady person is one who is inclined towards fruits other than the self. He has turned himself away from the vision of the self. Being impelled by desire, he becomes attached to fruits of actions, and remains bound for ever by them. That is, he becomes a perpetual Samsarin or one involved in transmigratory cycleendlessly. What is said is this: Free of attachment for fruits and attributing one's actions to Prakrti which has developed into the form of senses, one should perform actions merely to free the self from bondage.  
164 अथ देहाकारपरिणतायां प्रकृतौ कर्तृत्वसंन्यास उच्यते -'आत्मनः प्राचीनकर्ममूलदेहसम्बन्धप्रयुक्तम् इदं कर्मणां कर्तृत्वं न स्वरूपप्रयुक्तम्' इति विवेकविषयेण मनसा सर्वणि कर्माणि नवद्वारे पुरे सन्यस्य वशी देही स्वयं देहाधिष्ठानप्रयत्नम् अकुर्वन् देहेन न एव कारयन् सुखम् आस्ते । 13 । Next, the shifting of agency to Prakrti, from which the body has come into existence, is described:The embodied self who is self-controlled, renounces all actions to the city of nine gates, i.e., the body with its sensory and motor functions which are nine in number. He discriminates that all actions are due to conjunction of the self with the body which is rooted in previous Karmas, and is not by Its own nature. [It means that the self merely rests in the body, without any identification with bodily activities].  
165 साक्षाद् आत्मनः स्वाभाविकरूपम् आह -अस्य देवतिर्यङ्मनुष्यस्थावरात्मना प्रकृतिसंसर्गेण वर्तमानस्य लोकस्य देवाद्यसाधारणं कर्तृत्वं तत्तदसाधारणानि कर्माणि तत्तत् कर्म जन्यदेवादिफलसंयोगं च अयं प्रभुः अकर्मवश्यःस्वाभाविकस्वरूपेण अवस्थित आत्मा न सृजति, नोत्पादयति ।कः तर्हि? स्वभावः तु प्रवर्तते, स्वभावः प्रकृतिवासना; अनादिकालप्रवृत्तपूर्वपूर्वकर्मजनित-देवाद्यकारप्रकृतिसंसर्गकृततत्तदात्माभिमानजनितवासनाकृतम् ईदृशं कर्तृत्वादिकं सर्वम्, नस्वरूपप्रयुक्तम् इत्यर्थः । 14 । Sri Krshna now teaches the natural condition of the self as It is:When the world of embodied selves exists in conjunction with the Prakrti in the form of gods, animals, men, immobile things etc., the master (Prabhu i.e., the Jiva who is the master of the body), who is not subject to Karma and is established in Its own essential nature, does not bringabout: (i) the agency of gods, men etc. (ii) their manifold and particular actions and (iii) their connection with the fruits in the form of embodiment as gods etc., resulting from their actions. Who then brings about agency etc. ? It is only the tendencies that act. A tendency (Svabhava) is subtle impressions (Vasanas) originating from Prakrti. The meaning is that agency, etc., do not originate from the natural or pristine condition of the self but are generated by the subtle impressions created by misconceiving those forms of Prakrti, etc., as of the self. This is the result of the conjunction of the self with Prakrti in the form of gods, etc., which has been generated by the flow of previous Karmasbrought about in beginningless time.  
166 कस्यचित् स्वसम्बन्धितया अभिमतस्य पुत्रादेः पापं दुःखं न आदत्ते, न अपनुदति, कस्यचित्प्रतिकूलतया अभिमतस्य सुकृतं सुखं च न आदत्ते न अपनुदति । यतः अयं विभुः, न क्वाचित्कः, न देवादिदेहाद्यसाधारणदेशः, अत एव न कस्यचित् सम्बन्धी, न कस्यचित्प्रतिकूलः च । सर्वम् इदं वासनाकृतम् ।एवंस्वभावस्य कथम् इयं विपरीतवासना उत्पद्यते? अज्ञानेन आवृतं ज्ञानम्, ज्ञानविरोधिनापूर्वपूर्वकर्मणा स्वफलानुभवयोग्यत्वाय अस्य ज्ञानम् आवृतं संकुचितम्, तेन ज्ञानावरणरूपेण कर्मणा देवादिदेहसंयोगः तत्तदात्माभिमानरूपमोहः च जायते । ततः च तथाविधात्माभिमान-वासना तदुचितकर्मवासना च । वासनातो विपरीतात्माभिमानः कर्मारम्भश्च उपपद्यते । 15 । Because, It, the Atman is 'all-pervading', i.e., is not limited to particular area or space included in the bodies of gods,men etc.; It is not the relative or the enemy of anyone. For this reason It does not take away or remove the evil or suffering of anyone such as a son who is related andtherefore dear to one; nor does It take away, i.e., remove the happiness of anyone whom It deems with aversion. All this is the effect of Vasanasor subtle impressions of Prakrti. How then do these contrary Vasanas originate in the case of one whose intrinsic nature is as described above? In answer, it is said that knowledge is enveloped by the darkness of ignorance. The Atman's knowledge is enveloped, i.e., contracted by preceding Karmas which are opposed to knowledge, so that a person may be qualified to experience the fruits of his own Karma. It is by this Karma, which contracts knowledge, and can join the Jiva with the bodies of gods etc., that the misconception that the bodies are the selves is produced. Consequently there will originate theVasanas or the unconscious subtle impressions born of such misapprehension of the self and the inclination to undertake actions corresponding to them.  
167 'सर्वं ज्ञानप्लवेनैव वृजिनं संतरिष्यसि' (गीता 4।36) 'ज्ञानाग्निः सर्वकर्माणि भस्मसात्कुरुते तथा' (गीता 4।37) 'न हि ज्ञानेन सदृशं पवित्रम्' (गीता 4।38) इति पूर्वोक्तं स्वकाले संगमयति -एवं वर्तमानेषु सर्वात्मसु येषाम् आत्मनाम् उक्तलक्षणेन आत्मयाथात्म्योपदेशजनितेनआत्मविषयेण अहरहः अभ्यासाधेयातिशयेन निरतिशयपवित्रेण ज्ञानेन तद्ज्ञानावरणम्अनादिकालप्रवृत्तानन्तकर्मसंशयरूपाज्ञानं नाशितं तेषां तत् स्वाभाविकं परं ज्ञानं अपरिमितम्असंकुचितम् आदित्यवत् सर्वम् यथावस्थितं प्रकाशयति । तेषाम् इति विनष्टाज्ञानानांंबहुत्वाभिधानाद् आत्मस्वरूपबहुत्वम् - 'न त्वेवाहं जातु नासं न त्वं नेमे' (गीता 2।12) इति उपक्रमावगतम् अत्र स्पष्टतरम् उक्तम् ।न च इदं बहुत्वम् उपाधिकृतं विनष्टाज्ञानानाम् उपाधिगन्धाभावात् । 'तेषाम् आदित्यवज्ज्ञानम्' इति व्यतिरेकनिर्देशात् ज्ञानस्य स्वरूपानुबन्धित्वम् उक्तम् आदित्यदृष्टान्तेन च ज्ञातृज्ञानयोःप्रभाप्रभावतोः इव अवस्थानं च । तत एव संसारदशायां ज्ञानस्य कर्मणा संकोचः मोक्षदशायांविकासः च उपपन्नः । 16 । Sri Krshna now brings into proper sequence what has been taught before in the following verses: 'You will completely cross over the sea of all your sins with the boat of knowledge' (4.36), and 'The fire of knowledgereduces all Karmas to ashes in the same way' (4.37), and 'For there is no purifier here equal to knowledge' (4;38).While all these selves are thus deluded, in the case of enlightened souls, their delusive ignorance - which envelops knowledge and which is of theform of accumulated, beginningless and endless Karma - is destroyed byknowledge. As already described, this knowledge is produced by the teachings of the scriptures about the real nature of the self, which are enriched by daily practice. The purity of this knowledge is unexcelled. And in the case of those selves who regain the knowledge that is natural to Them, it is found that it is unlimited and uncontracted and illumining everything like the sun. Plurality of the selves in Their essence is expressly mentioned in the case of those whose ignorance is overcome, in the expression 'for those' in the text. What was stated at the commencement, 'There never was a time when I did not exist' (2.12) is expressed here with greater clarity.Moreover, this plurality is not due to limiting adjuncts imposed on a single universal self. For, as stated here, there cannot be any trace of such adjuncts for those whose ignorance is destroyed, and still They are described as a plurality. Here knowledge is taught as an attribute inseparable from the essential nature of the self, because a differencebetween the self and its knowledge is made out in the statement,'Knowledge, in their case illuminates like the sun'. By the illustration of the sun, the relation of the knower to his knowledge is brought out to be similar to the luminous object and its luminosity. Therefore, it is appropriate to understand that knowledge contracts by Karma in the stage of Samsara and expands in the stage of Moksha (release). [In this system, the Atman has two forms of Jnana or Knowledge - Dharmi-Jnana (self-awareness) and Dharma-bhuta-Jnana (awareness of objects other than itself). It is the latter that is contracted by ignorance and expands by knowledge. See Introduction.]  
168 तद्धुद्धयः तथाविधात्मदर्शनाध्यवसायाः, तदात्मानः तद्विषयमनसः, तन्निष्ठाः तदभ्यासनिरताः,तत्परायणाः तद् एव परम् अयनं येषां ते; एवम् अभ्यस्यमानेन ज्ञानेन निर्धूतप्राचीनकल्मषाः तथाविधम् आत्मानम् अपुनरावृत्तिं गच्छन्ति । यदवस्थाद् आत्मनः पुनरावृत्तिः न विद्यते सआत्मा अपुनरावृत्तिः, स्वेन रूपेण अवस्थितः, तम् आत्मानं गत्छन्ति इत्यर्थः । 17 । 'Those whose intellects pursue It,' i.e., those who have determined to have the vision of the self in this way; 'those whose minds think about It,'i.e., those whose minds have the self for their aim, those who undergo discipline for It, i.e., those who are devoted to the practices for Its attainment; 'those who hold It as their highest object,' i.e., those who consider It as their highest goal - such persons, having their previous impurities cleansed by the knowledge which is practised in this way,attain the self as taught. 'From that state there is no return' - the state from which there is no return means the state of the self. The meaning is that they attain the self which rests in Its own nature.  
169 विद्याविनयसंपन्ने ब्राह्मणे गोहस्तिश्वपचादिषु अत्यन्तविषमाकारतया प्रतीयमानेषु च आत्मसुपण्डिताः आत्मयाथात्म्यविदः ज्ञानैकाकारतया सर्वत्र समदर्शिनः । विषमाकारः तु प्रकृतेः, न आत्मनः 'आत्मा तु सर्वत्र ज्ञानैकाकारतया समः' इति पश्यन्ति इत्यर्थः । 18 । The sages are those who know the real nature of the self in all beings. They see the selves to be of the same nature, though they are perceived in extremely dissimilar embodiments such as those of one endowed with learning and humility, a mere Brahmana, a cow, an elephant, a dog,a dog-eater etc., because they all have the same form of knowledge in their nature as the Atman. The dissimilarity of the forms observed is dueto Prakrti (body) and not to any dissimilarity in the self; consequently they, the wise, perceive the self as the same everywhere, because allselves, though distinct, have the same form of knowledge.  
170 इह एव सादनानुष्ठानदशायाम् एव तैः सर्गो जितः संसारो जितः; येषाम् उक्तरीत्या सर्वेषुआत्मसु साम्ये स्थितं मनः, निर्दोषं हि समं ब्रह्म प्रकृतिसंसर्गदोषवियुक्ततया समम् आत्मवस्तु हि ब्रह्म; आत्मसाम्ये स्थिताः चेद् ब्रह्मणि स्थिता एव ते । ब्रह्मणि स्थितिः एव हि संसारजयः ।आत्मसु ज्ञानैकाकारतया साम्यम् एव अनुसन्दधाना मुक्ता एव इत्यर्थः । 19 । By those whose minds rest in equalness with regard to all selves in the aforesaid manner, even here, i.e., even at the stage of executing the means, Samsara is overcome. For the Brahman is of the same nature everywhere when uncontaminated. The meaning is that the substance of self, when free from the contaminations resulting from contact with the Prakrti (body), is the same everywhere i.e., as the Brahman (the Atman). If they are fixed in the equality of all selves, they verily abide in Brahman. The abidance in the Brahman is verily the conquest of Samsara. Those who contemplate on the sameness of all selves, because of their having the form of knowledge, they are liberated.  
171 येन प्रकारेण अवस्थितस्य कर्मयोगिनः समदर्शनरूपो ज्ञानविपाको भवति, तं प्रकारम् उपदिशति -यादृशदेहस्थस्य यदवस्थस्य प्राचीनकर्मवासनया यत् प्रियं यच्च अप्रियं तद् उभयं प्राप्य हर्षोद्वेगौ न कुर्यात् ।कथम्? स्थिरबुद्धिः - स्थिरे आत्मनि बुद्धिः यस्य स स्थिरबुद्धिः । असंमूढः - अस्थिरेण शरीरेण स्थिरम् आत्मानम् एकीकृत्य मोहः संमोहः, तद्रहितः ।तत् च कथम्?  ब्रह्मविद् ब्रह्मणि स्थितः, उपदेशेन ब्रह्मवित् सन् तस्मिन् ब्रह्मणि अभ्यासयुक्तः ।एतद् उक्तं भवति - तत्त्वविदाम् उपदेशेन आत्मयाथात्म्यविद् भूत्वा तत्र एव यतमानो देहाभिमानं परित्यज्य स्थिररूपात्मावलोकनप्रियानुभवे व्यवस्थितः अस्थिरे प्राकृतप्रियाप्रिये प्राप्य हर्षोद्वेगौ न कुर्याद् इति । 20 । Sri Krshna now teaches that mode of life by following which the maturity of knowledge in the form of sameness of vision comes to a Karma Yogin.Whatever is experienced as pleasant by one staying in a body and remaining in a particular condition because of the subtle impressions of his old Karmas, and whatever is experienced as unpleasant - on attaining those two types of experiences, one should not feel joy or grief. How? By having the mind on that 'Which is steadfast' i.e., the self, 'Undeluded',i.e., one must be free from the delusion of identity of the steadfast self with the transient body. And how can this be? He who knows Brahman and abides in Brahman, i.e., by becoming a knower of Brahman byinstruction by the teachers - such a person abides steadily, engaged in thepractices towards winning Brahman. What is said is this: From the instructions received from the sages who know the truth, one should learn what has to be learnt about the self. Endeavouring to actualise the same, one does not consider the body as the self and remains fixed in the joyous experience of the vision of thesteadfast self. Let him not rejoice and grieve when he experiences pleasant and unpleasant things, as such experiences result from the Prakrti and are transient.  
172 एवम् उक्तेन प्रकारेण बाह्मस्पर्शेषु आत्मव्यतिरिक्तविषयानुभवेषु असक्तमनाः अन्तरात्मनि एव यः सुखं विन्दति लभते स प्रकृत्यभ्यासं विहाय ब्रह्मयोगयुक्तात्मा ब्रह्माभ्यासयुक्तमना ब्रह्मानुभवरूपम् अक्षयं सुखं प्राप्नोति । 21 । He who finds happiness in the self within himself, his mind detached from external contact in the manner already mentioned, i.e., from experience of objects other than the self - such a person abandoning the contemplation on Prakrti or bodily experiences, has his mind engaged in the contemplation on Brahman i.e., the Atman. Thus he attains everlasting bliss which consists in the experience of Brahman (the self).  
173 विषयेन्द्रियस्पर्शजा ये भोगाः, दुःखयोनयः ते दुखोदर्का आद्यन्तवन्तः अल्पकालवर्तिनो हि उपलभ्यन्ते; न तेषु तद्याथात्म्यविद् रमते । 22 । Sri Krshna speaks of the abandonment of material pleasure as easy: Those pleasures which result from the contact of sense-objects with the senses, are the wombs of pain, i.e., have pain as their ultimate fruit. 'They bave a beginning and an end,' i.e., they are seen to remain only for a brief period and the reaction that follows their cessation is painful. He who knows what they themselves are, i.e., know themselves as Atman, will not find pleasure in them.  
174 शरीरविमोक्षणात् प्राग् इह एव साधनानुष्ठानदशायाम् एव आत्मानुभवप्रीत्या कामक्रोधोद्भववेगंसोढुं निरोद्धुं यः शक्नोति स युक्तः आत्मानुभवाय अर्हः । शरीरमोक्षणोत्तरकालम् आत्मानुभवसुखः संपत्स्यते । 23 । When a man is able to withstand, i.e., to control the impulses of emotions like desire and anger by his longing for the experience of self, he is released `here itself from the body,' i.e., even during the state when he is practising the means for release, he gains the capacity for experiencing the self. But he becomes blessed by the experience and getsimmersed in the bliss of the self only after the fall of the body (at the endof his Prarabdha or operative Karma). [The implication is that in this system, there is no Jivan-Mukti or complete liberation even when the body is alive. Only the state of Sthita-prajna or of `one of steady wisdom' can be attained by an embodied Jiva].  
175 यो बाह्यविषयानुभवं सर्वं विहाय अन्तःसुखः आत्मानुभवैकसुखः अन्तरारामः आत्मैकाधीनः स्वगुणैः आत्मा एव सुखवर्धको यस्य स तथोक्तः, तथा अन्तर्ज्योतिः आत्मैकज्ञानो यो वर्तते,स ब्रह्मभूतो योगी ब्रह्मनिर्वाणम् आत्मानुभवसुखं प्राप्नोति । 24 । He who, renouncing all the experiences of outside objects, 'finds joy within,' i.e., finds his sole joy in experiencing the self; 'who has his pleasure within,' i.e., whose pleasure-garden is the self; and with regard to whom the self increases his happiness by Its own qualities like bliss, knowledge, sinlessness, etc. ; 'whose light is within,' i.e., who lives, directing his knowledge solely on the self - a person of such a descriptionis the Yogin, who 'having become the Brahman (the self), attains the bliss of the Brahman' i.e., the bliss of experiencing the self.  
176 छिन्नद्वैधाः - शीतोष्णादिद्वन्द्वैः विमुक्ताः, यतात्मानः - आत्मनि एव नियमितमनसः, सर्वभूतहिते रताः - आत्मवत् सर्वेषां भूतानां हितेषु निरताः, ऋषयः - द्रष्टारः, आत्मावलोकनपरा ये एवंभूताः ते क्षीणाशेषात्मप्राप्तिविरोधिकल्मषाः ब्रह्मनिर्वाणं लभन्ते । 25 । The sages are seers who are devoted to the vision of the self. For them the pairs of opposites are annulled; i.e., they are freed from pairs of opposites like cold and heat; etc. 'They have their minds well subdued,' i.e., their minds are directed to the self. 'They are devoted to the welfare of all beings, i.e., they are interested in the welfare of all beings like theirown selves. Those persons who are like this have all their impurities, which are incompatible with the attainment of the self, annulled, and they attain to the bliss of the Brahman.  
177 उक्तगुणानां ब्रह्म अत्यन्तसुलभम् इत्याह -कामक्रोधवियुक्तानां यतीनां यतनशीलानां यतचेतसां नियमितमनसां विजितात्मनां विजितमनसांब्रह्मनिर्वाणम् अभितो वर्तते । एवंभूतानां हस्तस्थं ब्रह्मनिर्वाणम् इत्यर्थः । 26 । For those possessing the characteristics mentioned above, Sri Krshna now teaches that the Brahman is easy to attain.To those who are free from desire and wrath; `who are wont to exert themselves' i.e., who are practising self-control; whose 'thought is controlled,' i.e., whose minds are subdued; 'who have conquered them,' i.e., whose minds are under their control - to such persons the beatitude of the Brahman is close at hand. The beatitude of the Brahman is alreadyin hand to persons of this type.  
178 उक्तं कर्मयोगं स्वलक्ष्यभूतयोगशिरस्कम् उपसंहरति -बाह्यान् विषयस्पर्शान् बहिः कृत्वा बाह्येन्द्रियव्यापारं सर्वम् उपसंहृत्य योगयोग्यासने ऋजुकायउपविश्य चक्षुः भ्रुवोः अन्तरे नासाग्रे विन्यस्य नासाभ्यन्तरचारिणौ प्राणापानौ समौ कृत्वाउच्छ्वासनिः श्वासौ समगती कृत्वा आत्मावलोकनात् अन्यत्र प्रवृत्त्यनर्हेन्द्रियमनोबुद्धिः ततएव विगतेच्छाभयक्रोधो मोक्षपरायणो मोक्षैकप्रयोजनो मुनिः आत्मावलोकनशीलो यः सदा मुक्त एव; साध्यदशायाम् इव साधनदशायाम् अपि मुक्त एव स इत्यर्थः । 27-28 । Sri Krshna concludes the examination of Karma Yoga already stated, as reaching the highest point in the practice of mental concentration (Yoga) having for its object the vision of the self:`Shutting off all contact with outside objects,' i.e., stopping the outward functioning of the senses; seated with his trunk straightened in a posture fit for meditation (Yoga); 'fixing the gaze between the eye-brows,' i.e., at the root of the nose where the eye-brows meet; 'equalising inward andoutward breaths,' i.e., making exhalatory and inhalatory breath move equally: making the senses, Manas and intellect no longer capable of anything except the vision of the self, consequently being free from 'desire, fear and wrath'; 'who is intent on release as his final goal,' i.e., having release as his only aim - the sage who is thus intent on the vision of the self 'is indeed liberated for ever,'  i.e., he is almost a liberated person, as he would soon be in the ultimate stage of fruition.  
179 उक्तस्य नित्यनैमित्तिककर्मेतिकर्तव्यताकस्य कर्मयोगस्य योगशिरस्कस्य सुशकताम् आह -यज्ञतपसां भोक्तारं सर्वलोकमहेश्वरं सर्वभूतानां सुहृदं मां ज्ञात्वा शान्तिम् ऋच्छति कर्मयोगकरण एव सुखम् ऋच्छति ।सर्वलोकमहेश्वरं सर्वेषां लोकेश्वराणाम् अपि ईश्वरम् 'तमीश्वराणां परमं महेश्वरम्' (श्वे0 उ0 6।7) इति हि श्रूयते । मां सर्वलोकमहेश्वरं सर्वसुहृदं ज्ञात्वा मदाराधनरूपः कर्मयोग इति सुखेन तत्र प्रवर्तते इत्यर्थः, सुहृदाम् आराधनाय सर्वे प्रवर्तन्ते । 29 । Sri Krshna now says that Karma Yoga, described above which is facilitated by the performance of obligatory and occasional rites and which culminates in meditation (Yoga), is easy to practise:Knowing Me as the enjoyer of all sacrifices and austerities, as the Supreme Lord of all the worlds, and as the Friend of every being, he attains peace, i.e., wins happiness even while performing Karma Yoga. 'Him who is the Supreme Lord of all worlds' means 'Him who is the Lord of all the lords of the worlds.' For the Sruti says: 'Him who is the supreme mighty Lord of lords' (Sve.U.6.7). The meaning is that knowing Me as the Supreme Lord of all the worlds and the 'friend' of all and considering Karma Yoga to be My worship, he becomes gladly engaged in it. All beings endeavour to please a 'friend'.  
