8.1   अर्जुन उवाच किं तद्ब्रह्म किमध्यात्मं किं कर्म पुरुषोत्तम । अधिभूतं च किं प्रोक्तमधिदैवं किमुच्यते ।।    What is Brahman? What is Adhyatma? What is Karma? What is said to be Adhibhuta? O supreme Person, who is said to be Adhidaiva? 
 8.2   अधियज्ञः कथं कोऽत्र देहेऽस्मिन्मधुसूदन । प्रयाणकाले च कथं ज्ञेयोऽसि नियतात्मभिः ।।    Who is Adhiyajna in this body, and how is he adhiyajna, O Krishna? and how are you to be known at the time of death by the self-controlled 
 8.3   श्रीभगवानुवाच अक्षरं ब्रह्म परमं स्वभावोऽध्यात्ममुच्यते । भूतभावोद्भवकरो विसर्गः कर्मसंज्ञितः ।।    The lord said: The Brahman is the Aksara or the supreme and imperishable self. ature(Svabhava) is spoken as that which dwells with the self. Karma is that creative forces which produces the organization of material beings. 
 8.4   अधिभूतं क्षरो भावः पुरुषश्चाधिदैवतम् । अधियज्ञोऽहमेवात्र देहे देहभृतां वर ।।    Adhibhuta is perishable existence, O best of the embodied men; the Adhidaivata is the Purusa (individual self). I am the Adhyajna, herein the body. 
 8.5   अन्तकाले च मामेव स्मरन् मुक्त्वा कलेवरम् । यः प्रयाति स मद्भावं याति नास्त्यत्र संशयः ।।    And he who, at the last moment, while leaving the body, departs, remembering Me alone, attains My being; of this there is no doubt. 
 8.6   यं यं वापि स्मरन्भावं त्यजत्यन्ते कलेवरम् । तं तमेवैति कौन्तेय सदा तद्भावभावितः ।।    Remembering whatsoever thought one abandons the body at the end, to that alone goes, O Arjuna, ever dwelling in the thought thereof. 
 8.7   तस्मात्सर्वेषु कालेषु मामनुस्मर युध्य च । मय्यर्पितमनोबुद्धिर्मामेवैष्यस्यसंशयः ।।    Therefore, remember Me at all times and fight; with your mind and intellect set upon Me, you shall surely come to Me. 
 8.8   अभ्यासयोगयुक्तेन चेतसा नान्यगामिना । परमं पुरुषं दिव्यं याति पार्थानुचिन्तयन् ।।    Meditating with a mind trained by constant practice and not moving towards anything else, thinking of the Supreme Divine Person, onereaches Me, O Arjuna! 8.9 He who, at the time of death, remembers with devotion- witha mind unwavering by the power of Yog 
 8.9   कविं पुराणमनुशासितारम् अणोरणीयांसमनुस्मरेद्यः । सर्वस्य धातारमचिन्त्यरूपम् आदित्यवर्णं तमसः परस्तात् ।।    He who, at the time of death, remembers with devotion- with a mind unwavering by the power of Yoga and with Prana fixed betweenthe eyebrows-, the Omniscient, the Primeval, the Ruler, one subtler than the subtle, the creator of all, whose nature is inconc 
 8.10   प्रयाणकाले मनसाचलेन भक्त्या युक्तो योगबलेन चैव । भ्रुवोर्मध्ये प्राणमावेश्य सम्यक् स तं परं पुरुषमुपैति दिव्यम् ।।    He who, at the time of death, remembers with devotion- with a mind unwavering by the power of Yoga and with Prana fixed betweenthe eyebrows-, the Omniscient, the Primeval, the Ruler, one subtler than the subtle, the creator of all, whose nature is inconc 
 8.11   यदक्षरं वेदविदो वदन्ति विशन्ति यद्यतयो वीतरागाः । यदिच्छन्तो ब्रह्मचर्यं चरन्ति तत्ते पदं सङ्ग्रहेण प्रवक्ष्ये ।।    I shall tell you briefly that goal, which the knowers of the Veda call the imperishable, which ascetics, free from passion, enter,and desiring which they practice the vow of continence(Brahmacarya). 
 8.12   सर्वद्वाराणि संयम्य मनो हृदि निरुध्य च । मूर्ध्न्याधायात्मनः प्राणमास्थितो योगधारणाम् ।।    Who, controlling all the doors (senses), holding the mind within the heart, fixing his life-breath within the head, maintainshimself in steady concentration. 
 8.13   ओमित्येकाक्षरं ब्रह्म व्याहरन्मामनुस्मरन् । यः प्रयाति त्यजन्देहं स याति परमां गतिम् ।।    Uttering the sacred syllable Om which connotes Brahman, thinking of Me constantly- one who abandons the body and departs, he reaches thehighest state. 
 8.14   अनन्यचेताः सततं यो मां स्मरति नित्यशः । तस्याहं सुलभः पार्थ नित्ययुक्तस्य योगिनः ।।    I am easy of access, O Arjuna, to that Yogin who is ever integrated with Me, whose mind is not in anything else but Me and who ceaselesslyrecollects Me at all times. 
 8.15   मामुपेत्य पुनर्जन्म दुःखालयमशाश्वतम् । नाप्नुवन्ति महात्मानः संसिद्धिं परमां गताः ।।    Having attained Me, great soulless are never again subject to birth which is transient and abode of sorrow. They have found the highestperfection. 
 8.16   आब्रह्मभुवनाल्लोकाः पुनरावर्तिनोऽर्जुन । मामुपेत्य तु कौन्तेय पुनर्जन्म न विद्यते ।।    All the worlds, down from the realm of Brahma, are subject to return, O Arjuna. But on reaching Me there is no rebirth. 
 8.17   सहस्रयुगपर्यन्तमहर्यद्ब्रह्मणो विदुः । रात्रिं युगसहस्रान्तां तेऽहोरात्रविदो जनाः ।।    Those who know the duration of the day and night understand a day of Brahma to last for a thousand Yugas, and a night of Brahman tolast for another thousand Yugas. 
 8.18   अव्यक्ताद्व्यक्तयः सर्वाः प्रभवन्त्यहरागमे । रात्र्यागमे प्रलीयन्ते तत्रैवाव्यक्तसंज्ञके ।।    All the manifested entities come forth from the unmanifest (Avvakta) at the coming of his night they are dissolved into the same whichis known also as the unmanifest. 
 8.19   भूतग्रामः स एवायं भूत्वा भूत्वा प्रलीयते । रात्र्यागमेऽवशः पार्थ प्रभवत्यहरागमे ।।    The same multitude of beings come forth again and again irresistibly, and is dissolved at the coming of the night. And again it comes forthat the coming of the day. 
 8.20   परस्तस्मात्तु भावोऽन्योऽव्यक्तोऽव्यक्तात्सनातनः । यः स सर्वेषु भूतेषु नश्यत्सु न विनश्यति ।।    There is however, another non-manifest being than this non-manifest entity, which is eternal; this is not destroyed when all entities aredestroyed. 
 8.21   अव्यक्तोऽक्षर इत्युक्तस्तमाहुः परमां गतिम् । यं प्राप्य न निवर्तन्ते तद्धाम परमं मम ।।    This has been called unmanifest (Avyakta) and imperishable (Akshara). This they say, is the highest goal. This is My highest abode, reachingwhich the selves do not return to Samsara. 
 8.22   पुरुषः स परः पार्थ भक्त्या लभ्यस्त्वनन्यया । यस्यान्तःस्थानि भूतानि येन सर्वमिदं ततम् ।।    But the Supreme Person in whom all beings abide and by whom all this is pervaded is to be attained by undivided devotion, O Arjuna. 
 8.23   यत्र काले त्वनावृत्तिमावृत्तिं चैव योगिनः । प्रयाता यान्ति तं कालं वक्ष्यामि भरतर्षभ ।।    ow, I declare to you the time departing in which the Yogins do not return and also the time departing in which, they return, O Arjuna. 
 8.24   अग्निर्ज्योतिरहः शुक्लः षण्मासा उत्तरायणम् । तत्र प्रयाता गच्छन्ति ब्रह्म ब्रह्मविदो जनाः ।।    Light in the form of fire, the day, the bright fortnight, the six months of the northern course of the sun- the knowers of Brahman whotake this path go to the Brahman. 
 8.25   धूमो रात्रिस्तथा कृष्णः षण्मासा दक्षिणायनम् । तत्र चान्द्रमसं ज्योतिर्योगी प्राप्य निवर्तते ।।    Smoke, night, the dark fortnight, the six months of the southern course of the sun- the Yogin who take this path reaches the night ofthe moon and returns. 
 8.26   शुक्लकृष्णे गती ह्येते जगतः शाश्वते मते । एकया यात्यनावृत्तिमन्ययावर्तते पुनः ।।    These two paths, the bright and the dark, are said to be eternal. By the former one, a man goes to the plane of no-return, by the other,he returns again. 
 8.27   नैते सृती पार्थ जानन्योगी मुह्यति कश्चन । तस्मात्सर्वेषु कालेषु योगयुक्तो भवार्जुन ।।    o Yogin who knows the two paths is ever deluded. Therefore, O Arjuna, be integrated with Yoga always. 
 8.28   वेदेषु यज्ञेषु तपःसु चैव दानेषु यत्पुण्यफलं प्रदिष्टम् । अत्येति तत्सर्वमिदं विदित्वा योगी परं स्थानमुपैति चाद्यम् ।।    Whatever fruit of merit is prescribed for the study of the Vedas, for the performance of sacrifices, for the practice of austeritiesand gifts, all this does the Yogin transcended. Knowing this teaching of Mine, he reaches the supreme, primal abode. 
 8.0   ओंतत्सदिति श्रीमद्भगवद्गीतासु उपनिषत्सु ब्रह्मविद्यायां योगशास्त्रे श्रीकृष्णार्जुनसंवादे अक्षरपरब्रह्मयोगो नाम अष्टमोऽध्यायः  