113 यः अयं तव उदितो योगः स केवलं युद्धप्रोत्साहनाय इदानीम् उदित इति न मन्तव्यम् ।मन्वन्तरादौ एव निखिलजगदुद्धरणाय परमपुरुषार्थलक्षणमोक्षसाधनतया इमं योगम् अहम् एवविवस्वते प्रोक्तवान् । विवस्वान् च मनवे, मनुः इक्ष्वाकवे इति एवं सम्प्रदायपरम्परया प्राप्तम्इमं योगं पूर्वे राजर्षयो विदुः । स महता कालेन तत्तच्छ्रोतृबुद्विमान्द्याद् विनष्टप्रायः अभूत् । 1-2 । Now in the fourth chapter, the need for practising KarmaYoga is confirmed, as it was taught at the very beginning of the age of Manu for the deliverance of all beings. As it includes knowledge of the self, it is shown that such KarmaYoga includes Jnana Yoga in its scope. Further, the nature of Karma Yoga with its divisions and the pre-eminence of the knowledge portion in it, is spoken of. Incidentally the truth about the incarnations of the Lord is also set forth.This Karma Yoga declared to you should not be considered as having been taught now merely for creating encouragement in you for war. I Myself had taught thisYoga to Vivasvan at the commencement of Manu's age as a means for all beings to attain release, which is man's supreme end. Vivasvan taught it to Manu, and Manu to Ikshvaku.The royal sages of old knew this Yoga transmitted by tradition. Because of long lapse of time and because of the dullness of the intellect of those who heard it, it has been almost lost.  
114 स एव अयम् अस्खलितस्वरूपः पुरातनः योगः सख्येन अतिमात्रभक्त्या च माम् एव प्रपन्नाय ते मया प्रोक्तः सपरिकरः सविस्तरम् उक्त इत्यर्थः । मदन्येन केन अपि ज्ञातुं वक्तुं वा न शक्यम्,यत इदं वेदान्तोदितम् उत्तमं रहस्यं ज्ञानम् । 3 । It is the same ancient, unchanged Yoga which is now taught to you, who out of friendship and overwhelming devotion have resorted to Me whole-heartedly. The meaning is that it has been taught to you fully with all its accessories. Because it is the most mysterious knowledgedeclared in the Vedanta, it cannot be known or taught by anyone other than Myself.  
115 अस्मिन् प्रसङ्गे भगवदवतारयाथात्म्यं यथावद् ज्ञातुम् अर्जुन उवाच -अर्जुन उवाचकालसंख्यया अपरम् अस्मज्जन्मसमकालं हि भवतो जन्म; विवस्वतः च कालसंख्यया परम्अष्टाविंशतिचतुर्युगसंख्यातम् त्वम् एव आदौ प्रोक्तवान् इति कथम् एतद् असम्भावनीयं विशेषेण यथार्थं जानीयाम् ।ननु जन्मान्तरेण अपि वक्तुं शक्यम्; जन्मान्तरकृतस्य महतां स्मृतिः च युज्यते । इति अत्र न कश्चिद् विरोधः । न च असौ वक्तारम् एनं वसुदेवतनयं सर्वेश्वरं न जानाति; यत एवं वक्ष्यति -'परं ब्रह्म परं धाम पवित्रं परमं भवान् । पुरुषं शाश्वतं दिव्यमादिदेवमजं विभुम् ।। आहुस्त्वामृषयः सर्वे देवर्षिर्नारदस्तथा । असितो देवलो व्यासः स्वयं चैव ब्रवीषि मे ।।' (10।12-13) इति । युधिष्ठिरराजसूयादिषु भीष्मादिभ्यः च असकृत् श्रुतम् - 'कृष्ण एव हि लोकानामुत्पत्तिप्रभवाप्ययः । कृष्णस्य हि कृते भूतमिदं विश्वं चराचरम् ।।' (महा0 सभा0 38।23) इत्येवमादिषु 'कृष्णस्य हि कृते' इति कृष्णस्य शेषभूतम् इदं कृत्स्नं जगद् इत्यर्थः ।अत्र उच्यते - जानाति एव अयं भगवन्तं वसुदेवतनयं पार्थः । जानतः अपि अजानतः इव पृच्छतः अयम् आशयः - निखिलहेयप्रत्यनीककल्याणैकतानस्य सर्वेश्वरस्य सर्वज्ञस्य सत्यसंकल्पस्य च अवाप्तसमस्तकामस्य कर्मपरवशदेवमनुष्यादिसजातीयं जन्म किम् इन्द्रजालादिवत् मिथ्या किं वा सत्यम्? सत्यत्वे च कथं जन्मप्रकारः? किमात्मकः अयं देहः? कश्च जन्महेतुः? कदा च जन्म? किमर्थं वा जन्म? इति परिहारप्रकारेण प्रश्नार्थो विज्ञायते । 4 । In this connection, in order to know the truth about the Lord's descent correctly, Arjuna asked:According to the calculation of time, your birth was indeed later, contemporaneous with our births. And the birth of Vivasvan was at an earlier lime, reckoned as twenty-eight cycles of units of four Yugas each.How can I understand as true that you taught it in the beginning? Now, there is no contradiction here, for it was quite possible that He had taught Vivasvan in a former birth. The memory of what was done in former births is quite natural for great men. This should not be taken to mean that Arjuna does not know the son of Vasudeva, the speaker, as the Lord of all. Because he (Arjuna) says later on: 'You are the Supreme Brahman, the Supreme Light and the Supreme Purifier. All the seers proclaim You as the eternal Divine Purusha, the Primal Lord, unborn and all-pervading. So also proclaim the divine sage Narada, Asita, Devala andVyasa. You Yourself also are saying this to me' (10.12-13.)Arjuna had heard repeatedly from Bhishma and others, during the Rajasuya sacrifice of Yudhisthira, 'Krshna alone is the cause of creation and submergence of all the worlds. This universe, consisting of things both animate and inanimate, was created for the sake of Krshna' (Ma.Bha.2.38.23) 'The entire universe is subservient to Krshna' is themeaning of 'For the sake of Krshna.' This apparent contradiction may be explained as follows: Arjuna surely knows the son of Vasudeva as the Bhagavan. Though knowing Him as such, he questions as if he did not know Him. This is his intention. Can the birth of the Lord of all, who is antagonistic to all that is evil and wholly auspicious, omniscient, whose will is always true and whosedesires are fulfilled - can the birth of such a Person be of the same nature as that of the gods, men etc., who are subject to Karma? Or can it be false like the illusions of a magical show? Or could it be real? In other words, is the birth of the Supreme Being as the incarnate a real fact or a mere illusory phenomenon produced by a magician's art? If His birth is real, what is the mode of His birth? What is the nature of His body? What is the manner of His birth? What is the nature of this body of His? What is the cause of His birth? To what end is He born? The way in which Sri Krshna answers Arjuna's question, justifies the construing of his question in this way.  
116 श्रीभगवानुवाचअनेन जन्मनः सत्यत्वम् उक्तम् 'बहूति मे व्यतीताति जन्मानि' इति वचानात्, तव च इति दृष्टान्ततया उपादानाच्च । 5 । By this, the reality of the Lord's birth is declared in the sentence, 'Many births of Mine have passed.' 'So is it with you' is added by way of illustration.   
117 आत्मनः अवतारप्रकारं देहयाथात्म्यं जन्महेतुं च आह-अजत्वाव्ययत्वसर्वेश्वरत्वादि सर्वं पारमेश्वरं प्रकारम् अजहद् एव स्वां प्रकृतिम् अधिष्ठायआत्ममायया संभवामि, प्रकृतिः स्वभावः, स्वम् एव स्वभावम् अधिष्ठाय स्वेन एव रूपेणस्वेच्छया संभवामि इत्यर्थः ।स्वरूपं तु - 'आदित्यवर्णं तमसः परस्तात् ।' (यजुर्वे0 31।18) 'क्षयन्तमस्य रजसः पराके ।' (साम0 17।1।4।2) 'य एषोऽन्तरादित्ये हिरण्मयः पुरुषः' (छा0 उ0 1।6।6) 'तस्मिन्नयं पुरुषो मनोमयोऽमृतो हिरण्मयः'। (तै0 उ0 1।6।1) 'सर्वे निमेषा जज्ञिरे विद्युतः पुरुषादधि ।' (यजुर्वे0 32।2) 'भारूपः सत्यसंकल्प आकाशात्मा सर्वकर्मा सर्वकामः सर्वगन्धः सर्वरसः ।' (छा0 उ0 3।14।2) 'माहारजनं वासः' (बृ0 उ0 2।3।6) इत्यादिश्रुतिसिद्धम् ।आत्ममायया आत्मीयया मायया । 'माया वयुनं ज्ञानम्' (वे0 नि0 ध0 व0 22) इति ज्ञानपर्यायः अत्र मायाशब्दः । तथा च अभियुक्तप्रयोगः - 'मायया सततं वेत्ति प्राणिनां च शुभाशुभम्' इति । आत्मीयेन ज्ञानेन आत्मसंकल्पेन इत्यर्थः ।अतः अपहतपाप्मत्वादिसमस्तकल्याणगुणात्मकत्वं सर्वम् ऐश्वरं स्वभावम् अजहद् एव स्वम्एव रूपं देवमनुष्यादिसजातीयसंस्थानं कुर्वन् आत्मसंकल्पेन देवादिरूपः संभवामि ।तद् इदम् आह - 'अजायमानो बहुधा विजायते' (यजुर्वेद 31।19) इति श्रुतिः । इतरपुरुषसाधारणं जन्म अकुर्वन् देवादिरूपेण स्वसंकल्पेन उक्तप्रक्रियया जायत इत्यर्थः । 'बहूनि मे व्यतीतानि जन्मानि तव चार्जुन । तान्यहं वेद सर्वाणि' (गीता 4।5) 'तदात्मानं सृजाम्यहम् ।।' (गीता 4।7)'जन्म कर्म च मे दिव्यमेवं यो वेत्ति तत्त्वतः ।' (गीता 4।9) इति पूर्वापराविरोधाच्च । 6 । The mode of incarnation, the reality of His body and the cause of His birth are explained in the following verse.Without forsaking any of the My special qualities, as supreme rulership, birthlessness, imperishability etc., I am born by My free will. Prakrti means one's own nature. The meaning is that by employment of My own Nature and taking a form of My choice, I incarnate by My own will (Maya).The character of My own Nature becomes evident from the following Srutis: 'Him who is of sun-Iike colour, beyond darkness (Tamas)' (Sve.U" 3.8), 'Him who abides beyond Rajas (active matter)' (Sama 17.1.4.2); 'This Golden Person who is within the sun' (Cha. U .1.6.6); 'Within the heart, there is the Person consisting of mind,immortal and golden' (Tai.U. 1.6.1); 'All mortal creatures have comefrom the self-luminous Person' (Yaj.32.2); 'Whose form is light, whose will is truth, who is the self of ethereal space, who contains all actions, contains all desires, contains all odours, contains all tastes' (Cha.U., 3.14.2); 'Like a raiment of golden colour' (Br.U.4.3.6).'Atma-mayaya' means through the Maya which belongs to Myself. Here the term Maya is identical with knowledge as stated in the lexicon of Yaska: 'Maya is wisdom, knowledge.' Further there is the usage of competent people: 'By Maya, He knows the good and bad of his creatures. ' Hence by My own knowledge means 'by My will.' Hence, without abandoning My essential attributes which belong to Me the Lordof all, such as being free of sins, having auspicious attributes etc., and creating My own form similar to the configuration of gods, men etc., I incarnate in the form of gods etc. The Sruti teaches the same thing: 'Being unborn, He is born in various forms' (Tai.A., 3.12.7). The purport is that His birth is quite unlike that of ordinary beings. Thedissimilarity consists in that He is born out of His own will unlike ordinary beings whose birth is necessitated by their Karma. Thus construed, there is no contradiction also between what was taught earlier and what is taught later as in the statements: 'Many births of Mine have passed, OArjuna, and similarly yours also. I know them all' (4.5); 'I incarnate Myself' (4.7); and 'He who thus knows in truth My birth and work' (4.9). [All this elaboration is meant to refute the doctrine of mere apparency of incarnations as taught by the Advaitins. Ramanuja, as stated in his Introduction to the Bhashya, upholds the absolute reality of incarnations].  
118 जन्मकालम् आह -न कालनियमः अस्मत्संभवस्य; यदा यदा हि धर्मस्य वेदेन उदितस्य चातुर्वर्ण्यचातुराश्रम्य-व्यवस्थया अवस्थितस्य कर्तव्यस्य ग्लानिः भवति, यदा यदा च तद्विपर्ययस्य अधर्मस्यअभ्युत्थानं तदा अहम् एव स्वसंकल्पेन उक्तप्रकारेण आत्मानं सृजामि । 7 । Sri Krshna now specifies the times of His incarnations.There is no restriction as to the time of My birth; whenever the Dharma taught by the Vedas that must be observed according to the arrangementsof the four stations and the four stages of life declines, and Adharma,its opposite, increases, then I Myself, by My own will and in the mannerstated, incarnate Myself.  
119 जन्मनः प्रयोजनम् आह - साधव उक्तलक्षणधर्मशीला वैष्णवाग्रेसरा मत्समाश्रयणे प्रवृत्ता मन्नामकर्मस्वरूपाणाम्अवाङ्नसगोचरतया मद्दर्शनाद् ऋते स्वात्मधारणपोषणादिसुखम् अलभमाना अणुमात्रकालम्अपि कल्पसहस्रं मन्वानाः प्रशिथिलसर्वगात्रा भवेयुः इति मत्स्वरूपचेष्टितावलोकनालापादि-दानेन तेषां परित्राणाय तद्विपरीतानां विनाशाय च क्षीणस्य वैदिकधर्मस्य मदाराधनरूपस्यआराध्यस्वरूपप्रदर्शनेन तस्य स्थापनाय च देवमनुष्यादिरूपेण युगे युगे संभवामि ।कृतत्रेतादियुगविशेषनियमः अपि नास्ति इत्यर्थः । 8 । Sri Krshna gives the purpose of His birth. The good are those who follow the Dharma, as defined above. They are the foremost among the Vaishnavas, who have taken refuge in Me. While My name, acts and form are inaccessible to speech and thought, these devotees cannot get support, sustenance etc., for themselves without perceiving Me. They regard even a moment's time without Me as a thousand Kalpas. They become broken in every limb because of the separation from Me. So I am born from age to age in the forms of gods, men etc., for protecting them by affording them the opportunity to behold My form and acts and to converse with Me. I am born also for the destruction of those who are opposed to such devotees and for the restoration of declining Vedic Dharma, which consists of My worship. The main purpose of incarnation is the revealingof His adorable form, so that all may worship Him. The destruction of the wicked is secondary only, There is no specific restrictions of the Yugas like Krta, Treta etc., for the appearance of Divine Incarnations.  
120 एवं कर्ममूलभूतहेयत्रिगुणप्रकृतिसंसर्गरूपजन्मरहितस्य सर्वेश्वरत्वसर्वज्ञत्वसत्यसंकल्पत्वादि-समस्तकल्याणगुणोपेतस्य साधुपरित्राणमत्समाश्रयणैकप्रयोजनं दिव्यम् अप्राकृतं मदसाधारणं मम जन्म चेष्टितं च तत्त्वतः यो वेत्ति स वर्तमानं देहं परित्यज्य पुनः जन्म न एति माम् एव प्राप्नोति ।मदीयदिव्यजन्मचेष्टितयाथात्म्यविज्ञानेन विध्वस्तसमस्तमत्समाश्रयणविरोधिपाप्मा अस्मिन् एव जन्मनि यथोदितप्रकारेण माम् आश्रित्य मदेकप्रियो मदेकचित्तो माम् एव प्राप्नोति । 9 । He who knows truly My life and actions, super-natural and special to Me, which are intended solely for the protection of the good and to enable them to take refuge in Me, Me who am devoid of birth, unlike ordinary beings whose birth is caused by Karma associated with Prakrti and its three Gunas producing the evil of bondage, and who is endowed with auspicious attributes such as Lordship over all, omniscience, infallible will etc., - such a person after abandoning the present body will never be born, but will reach Me only. By true knowledge of Mydivine birth and acts, all his sins that stand in his way of taking refuge in Me are destroyed. In this birth itself, resorting to Me in the manner already described, and loving Me and concentrating on Me alone, he reaches Me.  
121 तद् आह - मदीयजन्मकर्मत्त्वज्ञानाख्येन तपसा पूता बहव एवं संवृत्ताः । तथा च श्रुतिः - 'तस्य धीराः परिजानन्ति योनिम्' (तै0 आ0 3।13।2) इति । धीरा धीमतामग्रेसरा एव तस्य जन्मप्रकारं जानन्ति इत्यर्थः । 10 । Sri Krshna speaks of the same thing:Purified by the austerity called knowledge of the truth of My life and deeds, many have become transformed in this manner. The Sruti says to the same effect: 'The wise know well the manner in which He is born' (Tai.A., 3.13;1). 'Dhiras' means the foremost among the wise. The meaning is the wise know the manner of His birth thus.   
122 न केवलं देवमनुष्यादिरूपेण अवतीर्य मत्समाश्रयणापेक्षाणां परित्राणं करोमि । अपि तु -ये मत्समाश्रयणापेक्षा यथा येन प्रकारेण स्वापेक्षानुरूपं  मां संकल्प्य प्रपद्यन्ते समाश्रयन्ते तान् प्रति तथैव तन्मनीषितप्रकारेण भजामि मां दर्शयामि । किमत्र बहुना? सर्वे मनुष्या मदनुवर्तनैकमनोरथा मम वर्त्म मत्स्वभावं सर्वं योगिनां वाङ्मनसागोचरम् अपि स्वकीयैः चक्षुरादिकरणैः सर्वशः स्वापेक्षितैः सर्वप्रकारैः अनुभूय अनुवर्तन्ते । 11 । It is not that I protect only those who resort to Me in incarnations in the shapes of gods, men etc.Whoever desirous of resorting to Me, in whatever manner they think of Me according to their inclinations and take refuge in Me, i.e, resort to Me - I favour them in the same manner as desired by them; I reveal Myself to them. Why say much here! All men who are intent on following Me do experience, with their own eyes and other organs of sense in all ways, i.e., in every way wished by them, My form (including images), however inaccessible it might be to speech and thought of the Yogins.  
123 इदानीं प्रासङ्गिकं परिसमाप्य प्रकृतस्य कर्मयोगस्य ज्ञानाकारताप्राकारं वक्तुं तथाविधकर्मयोगाधिकारिणो दुर्लभत्वम् आह -सर्व एव पुरुषाः कर्मणां फलं काड्क्षमाणा इन्द्रादिदेवता यथाशास्त्रं यजन्ते आराधयन्ति ।न तु कश्चिद् अनभिसंहितफल इन्द्रादिदेवतात्मभूतं सर्वयज्ञानां भोक्तारं मां यजते । कुत एतत्? यतः क्षिप्रम् अस्मिन् एव मानुषे लोके कर्मजा पुत्रपश्वन्नाद्या सिद्धिः भवति । मनुष्यलोकशब्दः स्वर्गादिलोकप्रदर्शनार्थः ।सर्व एव हि लौकिकाः पुरुषा अक्षीणानादिकालप्रवृत्तानन्तपापसंचयतया अविवेकिनःक्षिप्रफलाभिकाङ्क्षिणः, पुत्रपश्वन्नादिस्वर्गाद्यर्थतया सर्वाणि कर्माणि, इन्द्रादिदेवताराधनमात्राणिकुर्वते; न तु कश्चित् संसारोद्विग्नहृदयो मुमुक्षुः उक्तलक्षणं कर्मयोगं मदाराधनभूतम् आरभते इत्यर्थः । 12 । Now, after completing the incidental topic (with regard to divine incarnations), in order to teach the mode in which Karma Yoga itself acquires the form of Jnana, He begins to speak of the difficulty in finding persons who are qualified for Karma Yoga of this kind.All men, desirous of the fruits of their actions, 'sacrifice', i.e., worship or propitiate Indra and other divinities only. But nobody worships Me abandoning attachment to fruits - Me, who am the Self of Indra and other divinities and the real enjoyer of all sacrifices. Why is this so?Because in this world of men, fruits in the form of sons, cattle, food etc.,follow soon from their performance of such sacrificial rites. The phrase, 'the world of men' implies heaven etc., also. Because the unending accumulation of evil heaped up from beginningless time bas not beenexhausted; all those worldly people lack discernment. Therefore they want rapid results and perform those rituals which consist of the worship of Indra and other divinities for the sake of sons, cattle, food etc., and forthe sake of heaven etc. But none with his mind anguished by Samsaraand aspiring for final release, practises Karma Yoga of the kind described above. Real Karma Yoga is My worship.  
124 यथोक्तकर्मयोगारम्भविरोधिपापक्षयहेतुम् आह -चातुर्वर्ण्यप्रमुखं ब्रह्मादिस्तम्बपर्यन्तं कृत्स्नं जगत् सत्त्वादिगुणविभागेन तदनुगुणशमादि-कर्मविभागेन च प्रविभक्तं मया सृष्टम् । सृष्टिग्रहणं प्रदर्शनार्थम्, मया एव रक्ष्यते, मया एव च उपसंह्रियते । तस्य विचित्रसृष्ट्यादेः कर्तारम् अपि अकर्तारं मां विद्धि । 13 । Sri Krshna now speaks of the cause which annuls the evil obstructing the starting of Karma Yoga.The whole universe beginning with Brahma and ending with a cluster of grass, with the system of four stations divided according to Sattva and other Gunas and by actions like self-control corresponding to the Gunas, was created by Me. The mention of 'creation' is for illustration. The universe is protected by Me alone and is withdrawn by Me alone. KnowMe to be the creato of this manifold actions of creation etc., but at the same time to be non-agent.  
125 कथम् इति अत्र आह -यत इमानि विचित्रसृष्ट्यादीनि न मां कर्माणि लिम्पन्ति न मां संबध्नन्ति । न मत्प्रयुक्तानि इमानि देवमनुष्यादिवैचित्र्याणि सृज्यानां पुण्यपापरूपकर्मविशेषप्रयुक्तानि इत्यर्थः । अतः प्राप्ताप्राप्तविवेकेन विचित्रसृष्ट्यादेः न अहं कर्ता । यतश्च सृष्टाः क्षेत्रज्ञाः सृष्टिलब्ध-करणकलेवराः सृष्टिलब्धं भोग्यजातं फलसङ्गादिहेतुस्वकर्मानुगुणं भुञ्जते, सृष्ट्यादिकर्मफलेच तेषाम् एव स्पृहा इति न मे स्पृहा ।तथा सूत्रकारः - 'वैषम्यनैर्घृण्ये न सापेक्षत्वात्' (ब्र0 सू0 2।1।34) इति । तथा आह भगवान् पराशरः - 'निमित्तमात्रमेवायं सृज्यानां सर्गकर्मणि । प्रधानकारणीभूता यतो वै सृज्यशक्तयः।।निमित्तमात्रं मुक्त्वेदं नान्यत्किञ्चिदपेक्ष्यते । नीयते तपतां श्रेष्ठ स्वशक्त्या वस्तु वस्तुताम् ।।'  (वि0 पु0 1।4।51-52) इति । सृज्यानां देवादीनां क्षेत्रज्ञानां सृष्टेः कारणमात्रम् एव अयं परमपुरुषः, देवादिवैचित्र्ये तु प्रधानकारणं सृज्यभूतक्षेत्रज्ञानां प्राचीनकर्मशक्तय एव । अतो निमित्तमात्रं मुक्त्वा सृष्टेः कर्तारं परमपुरुषं मुक्त्वा इदं क्षेत्रज्ञवस्तु देवादिविचित्रभावे न अन्यद् अपेक्षते; स्वगतप्राचीनकर्मशक्त्या एव हि देवादिवस्तुभावं नीयते इत्यर्थः ।एवम् उक्तेन प्रकारेण सृष्ट्यादेः कर्तारम् अपि अकर्तारं सृष्ट्यादिकर्मफलसङ्गरहितं च यो माम् अभिजानाति स कर्मयोगारम्भविरोधिभिः फलसङ्गादिहेतुभिः प्राचीनकर्मभिः न संबध्यते;मुच्यते इत्यर्थः । 14 । Sri Krshna explains here how this is possible.These actions of varied nature like creation etc., do not contaminate Me, i.e., do not bind Me. For the distinctions of gods, men etc., are not brought about by Me, but by the particular Karmas, good and evil, of created beings. Therefore by the process of discriminating between the acquired and the inherent, it will be found that I am not the author of this varied creations etc. The created or embodied selves,who are endowed with bodies and organs at the time of creation in accordance with their own Karmas springing from attachment to fruits etc., experience all enjoyments available in creation. Thus for them (embodied selves) alone;there is desire for the results of creation etc., and for the results of their Karmas. There is no desire in Me for it.The Sutrakara says to the same effect: 'No partiality or cruelty on accountof there being dependence (on the Karma of souls for inequalities)' (Br.S., 2.1.34). Bhagavan Parasara also says so: 'He (the Lord) is only the operative cause in the creation of beings. That from which the creative forces spring constitutes the material cause. Leaving aside the material cause, the being that becomes embodied does not require the help of any other thing whatever. A thing is led into the condition in which it is, O best of ascetics, only by its own potentiality' (V.P.,1.4.51-2). The SupremePerson is only the operative cause with regard to the creation of those to be created, i.e., the selves in the bodiesof gods etc. The material cause for the differences into gods etc., is the potentiality in the form of previous Karmas of the selves to be created. Therefore, leaving aside the operative cause, i.e., the Supreme Person, the creator, the embodied beings do not require anything else for causing difference into conditions of gods etc. For these selves are led to take the forms of gods etc., by the potentiality of their own old Karma with which they are connected. Such is the meaning.He who knows Me thus to be the agent of creation etc., and still a non-agent, i.e., as one who has no desire for the results of the acts of creation etc., such a person is not tied by previous actions, i.e., he is freed from the old Karmas which obstruct the undertaking of Karma Yoga by causing attachment to results. Such is the purport.  
126 एवं मां ज्ञात्वा अपि विमुक्तपापैः पूर्वैः अपि  मुमुक्षुभिः उक्तलक्षणं कर्म कृतम् । तस्मात् त्वम् उक्तप्रकारमद्विषयज्ञानविधूतपापः पूर्वैः विवस्वन्मन्वादिभिः कृतं पूर्वतरं पुरातनं तदानीम् एव मया उक्तं वक्ष्यमाणाकारं कर्म एव कुरु ।। 15 ।। Actions of the kind described above were performed even by the aspirants of old for liberation, who have become free from evil after knowing Me in this way. Therefore, after having got rid of the sins by knowledge of Me in the aforesaid way, perform actions in the same way as they were performed by those ancients like Vivasvan, Manu etc., in olden times, in the way in which their performance was taught by Me even then. I shall declare it again in what follows.  
127 वक्ष्यमाणस्य कर्मणो दुर्ज्ञानताम् आह - मुमुक्षणा अनुष्ठेयं कर्म किंस्वरूपम् ? अकर्म च किम् ? फलाभिसन्धिरहितं भगवदाराधनरूपं कर्म; अकर्म इति कर्तुः आत्मनो यथात्म्यज्ञानम् उच्यते । अनुष्ठेयं कर्म तदन्तर्गतं ज्ञानं च किंस्वरूपम् ? इति उभयत्र कवयः विद्वांसः अपि मोहिताः, यथार्थतया न जानन्ति । एवम् अन्तर्गतज्ञानं यत् कर्म तत् ते प्रवक्ष्यामि; यद् ज्ञात्वा अनुष्ठाय अशुभात् संसारबन्धात् मोक्ष्यसे । कर्तव्यकर्मज्ञानं हिअनुष्ठानफलम् । 16 । Sri Krshna stresses the difficulty of undertaking the type of Karma that is going to be taught now.What is the form of the action which should be done by an aspirant for liberation? And what is non-action? Knowledge about the true nature of the acting self, is spoken of as non-action. The wise, even the learned scholars, are puzzeled, i.e., do not truly know, both these - the proper formof the actions to be performed and the proper form of knowledge included in it. I shall teach you that action which includes knowledge within itself. Knowing, i.e., following it, you will be released from evil, i.e., from the bondage of Samsara. Knowledge about the work to be performed results in its performance.  
128 कुतः अस्य दुर्ज्ञानता? इति अत्र आह-यस्मात् मोक्षसाधनभूते कर्मणः स्वरूपे बोद्धव्यम् अस्ति; विकर्मणि च; नित्यनैमित्तिककाम्य-कर्मरूपेण तत्साधनद्रव्यार्जनाद्याकारेण च, विविधताम् आपन्नं कर्म विकर्म । इकर्ममि ज्ञाने चबोद्धव्यम् अस्ति । गहना दुर्विज्ञाना मुमुक्षोः कर्मणो गतिः ।विकर्मणि च बोद्धव्यम् - नित्यनैमित्तिककाम्यद्रव्यार्जनादौ कर्मणि फलभेदकृतं वैविध्यं परित्यज्य मोक्षैकफलतया एकशास्त्रार्थत्वानुसन्धानम्; तदेतद् 'व्यवसायात्मिका बुद्धिरेका' (गीता0 2।410) इत्यत्र एव उक्तम् इति न इह प्रपञ्च्यते । 17 । Why is it so difficult to know this Karma ? Sri Krshna replies:There is something which ought to be known in regard to action (Karma) which forms the means of attaining release. So also is the case in regard to 'multi-form or varied forms of action' (Vikarma). These are what have acquired variegation as obligatory, occasional and desire-prompted works requiring numerous requisites. There is also something to be known about non-action, i.e., knowledge of the self.Therefore, deep, i.e., difficult to understand, is the way of action to be pursued by the seeker after release. What should be known as regards multi-form or variegated forms of Karma is that the attribution of differences leading to differences of fruits in obligatory, occasional anddesire-prompted rites and acquisition of things required for their performance, etc., must be renounced, realising that the Sastras aim at only one result, i.e., release (and not several results said to accrue from these works). This has been declared in connection with the teaching, 'The resolute mind is one-pointed' (2.41) and is not elaborated here.  
129 कर्माकर्मणोः बोद्धव्यम् आह -अकर्मशब्देन अत्र कर्मेतरत् प्रस्तुतम् आत्मज्ञानम् उच्यते । कर्मणि क्रियमाणे एव आत्मज्ञानं यः पश्येत् अकर्मणि च आत्मज्ञाने वर्तमान एव यः कर्म पश्येत् ।किम् उक्तं भवति?क्रियमाणम् एव कर्म आत्मयाथात्म्यानुसन्धानेन ज्ञानाकारं यः पश्येत्, तत् च ज्ञानं कर्मणिअन्तर्गततया कर्माकारं यः पश्येद् इति उक्तं भवति; क्रियमाणे हि कर्मणि कर्तृभूतात्मयाथात्म्यानुसन्धानेन तद् उभयं सम्पन्नं भवति ।एवम् आत्मयाथात्म्यानुसन्धानगर्भं कर्म यः पश्येत् स बुद्धिमान् कृत्स्नशास्त्रार्थवित्, मनुष्येषुस युक्तः मोक्षार्हः स एव कृत्स्नकर्मकृत् कृत्स्नशास्त्रार्थकृत् । 18 । Sri Krshna explains what must be known in regard to action and non-action.Here by the term 'non-action', the knowledge of the self, which is distinct from action and which forms the subject under consideration, is meant. 'He who sees non-action in action and also action in non-action,denotes him who can perceive knowledge of the self even while action is being performed and who can also perceive action while engaged in non-action, i.e., knowledge of the self. What is the import of this saying?What is taught here is this: One can perceive, by constant contemplation on the truth about the self, that the action that is being performed in itself is a form of knowledge. One can also perceive that this knowledge is also of the form of Karma because of its being contained in Karma Yoga. Both these (i.e., action in the form of knowledge and knowledge in the form of actions) are accomplished by contemplation on the true nature of the self, even while work is being performed. Thus, he who can see actions as included in contemplation on the reality of the self, is wise, i.e., he knows the full meaning of the Sastras; he is fit among men, i.e., fit to attain release. He alone has fulfilled all actions, i.e., carried out the entire purpose of the Sastras. [The purport is that no contradiction between knowledge and action is felt by one who knows the philosophy of the self].  
130 प्रत्यक्षेण क्रियमाणस्य कर्मणो ज्ञानाकारता कथम् उपपद्यते?  इत्यत्र आह -यस्य मुमुक्षोः सर्वे द्रव्यार्जनादिलौकिककर्मपूर्वकनित्यनैमित्तिककाम्यरूपकर्मसमारम्म्भाः कामवर्जिताः फलसङ्गरहिताः संकल्पवर्जिताः च ।प्रकृत्या तद्गुणैः च आत्मानम् एकीकृत्य अनुसन्धानं संकल्पः । प्रकृतिवियुक्तात्मस्वरूपानु-सन्धानयुक्ततया तद्रहिताः । तम् एवं कर्म कुर्वाणं पण्डितं कर्मान्तर्गतात्मयाथात्म्यज्ञानाग्निना दग्धप्राचीनकर्माणम् आहुः तत्त्वज्ञाः । अतः कर्मणो ज्ञानाकारत्वम् उपपद्यते । 19 । How is the form of knowledge accomplished through works which are obviously activities that are being performed? Sri Krshna explains:In the case of an aspirant for release, all undertakings of actions in the form of obligatory, occasional and desiderative acts accomplished through the acquisition of materials for their performance as also other works, are free from desire, i.e., are devoid of attachment to fruits. They are devoid of delusive identification. If the mind identifies the self with Prakrti and its Gunas, it is Sankalpa, i.e., 'delusive identification.' Genuine Karma Yoga is free from Such identification. Such identification is overcome through contemplation on the real nature of the self as different from Prakrti. Those who know the truth call him a sage, who acts in this way and whose previous Karmas are thereby burntup by the fire of knowledge of the real nature of the self generated along with his actions. He is a true Karma Yogin.Thus that knowledge is involved in true Karma Yoga, is established.  
131 एतद् एव विवृणोति -कर्मफलासङ्गं त्यक्त्वा नित्यतृप्तो नित्ये स्वात्मनि एव तृप्तः, निराश्रयः अस्थिप्रकृतौ आश्रयबुद्धिरहितो यः कर्माणि करोति । स कर्मणि आभिमुख्येन प्रवृत्तः अपि न एव किंचित् कर्म करोति; कर्मापदेशेन ज्ञानाभ्यासम् एव करोति इत्यर्थः । 20 । Sri Krsna elaborates this point again:Whoever performs actions, renouncing attachment to their fruits and is satisfied with the eternal, i.e., satisfied with his own self, and dependent on none, i.e., devoid of dependence on transient Prakrti (body and external nature) - such a person, even though fully engaged in actions, does not act at all. He is engaged in the practice of knowledge under the form of action.  
132 पुनः अपि कर्मणा ज्ञानाकारता एव विशोध्यते -निराशीः निर्गतफलाभिसन्धिः, यतचित्तात्मा यतचित्तमनाः, त्यक्तसर्वपरिग्रहः आत्मैकप्रयोजनतया प्रकृतिप्राकृतवस्तुनि ममतारहितो यावज्जीवं केवलं शारीरम् एव कर्म कुर्वन् किल्बिषं संसारं न आप्नोति । ज्ञाननिष्ठाव्यवधानरहितकेवलकर्मयोगेन एवं रूपेण आत्मानं पश्यति इत्यर्थः । 21 । Again, Karma, having the form of knowledge, is examined:'Free from desire' means having no attachment to the fruits of actions. 'His intellect and mind controlled' means one whose intellect and mind are under control. 'Giving up all possessions' means one who, on accountof his having the self as his primary objective, is devoid of the sense ofownership in relation to Prakrti and its derivatives. One who is thus engaged in bodily work alone as long as he lives, does not incur any sin, i.e., does not get engrossed in Samsara. He gets the vision of the self by Karma Yoga of this kind itself, and need not resort to any exclusive practice of Jnana Yoga in between liberation and the practice of Karma Yoga of the above description.  
133 यदृच्छोपनतशरीरधारणहेतुवस्तुसन्तुष्टः द्वन्द्वातीतः यावत्साधनसमाप्त्यवर्जनीयशीतोष्णादिसहःविमत्सरः अनिष्टोपनिपातहेतुभूतस्वकर्मनिरूपणेन परेषु विगतमत्सरः समः सिद्धौ असिद्वौ च युद्धादिकर्मसु जयादिसिद्ध्यसिद्ध्योः समचित्तः कर्म एव कृत्वा अपि ज्ञाननिष्ठां विना अपि न निबध्यते, न संसारं प्रतिपद्यते । 22 । Content with whatever chance may bring for the maintenance of the body; 'rising above the pairs of opposites' means enduring cold, heat and such other experiences until one has completed the practice of Karma Yoga; 'free from ill-will?' i.e., free from ill-will towards others, seeing his own Karma as the cause of his adversity; 'even-minded in success and failure,' i.e., even-minded at success like victory in war, etc., and failure therein - such a person 'is not bound, 'i.e., he does not fall into Samsara, though devoted to action without any exclusive practice of Jnana Yoga.  
134 आत्मविषयज्ञानावस्थितमनस्त्वेन विगततदितरसङ्गस्य तत एव निखिलपरिग्रहविनिर्मुक्तस्यउक्तलक्षणयज्ञादिकर्मनिर्वृत्तये वर्तमानस्य पुरुषस्य बन्धहेतुभूतं प्राचीनं कर्म समग्रं प्रविलीयते निःशेषं क्षीयते । 23 । Of a person whose attachment to all objects is gone because of his mind being established in the knowledge of the self, who is therefore liberated from accepting all worldly possessions and who is engaged in the performance of sacrifices etc., as described above - in the case of such a person his beginningless load of Karma, which is the cause of his bondage, is completely dissolved, i.e., destroyed without leaving any residue.  
135 प्रकृतिवियुक्तात्मस्वरूपानुसन्धानयुक्ततया कर्मणो ज्ञानाकारत्वम् उक्तम् । इदानीं सर्वस्य सपरिकरस्य कर्मणः परब्रह्मभूतपरमपुरुषात्मकत्वानुसन्धानयुक्ततया ज्ञानाकारत्वम् आह -हविः विशेष्यते; अर्प्यते अनेन इति अर्पणं स्रुगादि, तद् ब्रह्मकार्यत्वाद् ब्रह्म, ब्रह्म यस्य हविषःअर्पणं तद्ब्रह्मार्पणम् । ब्रह्म हविः स्वयं च ब्रह्मभूतं ब्रह्माग्नौ ब्रह्मभूते अग्नौ ब्रह्मणा कर्त्रा हुतम्;इति सर्वं कर्मब्रह्मात्मकत्वाद् ब्रह्ममयम् - इति यः समाधत्ते, स ब्रह्मकर्मसमाधिः । तेन ब्रह्मकर्म-समाधिना ब्रह्म एव गन्तव्यम् । ब्रह्मात्मकतया ब्रह्मभूतम् आत्मस्वरूपं गन्तव्यम् । मुमुक्षूणांक्रियमाणं कर्म परब्रह्मात्मकम् एव इत्यनुसन्धानयुक्ततया ज्ञानाकारं साक्षादात्मावलोकनसाधनम्,न ज्ञाननिष्ठाव्यवधानेन इत्यर्थः । 24 । So far the nature of Karma as having the form of knowledge has been described as emerging from constant contemplation on the nature of the self as different from Prakrti. And now Sri Krshna says that all actions together with their ancillaries, have the form of knowledge because of constant contemplation by the aspirant on the Supreme Person who is the Supreme Brahman, as being his soul.The expression 'Brahman' is the instrument to offer with* is adjectival [*It is to be remembered that in Ramanuja's system 'Brahman' in theprimary sense is the `Whole' with the Supreme Being as the Soul andAtmans and Matter (Prakrti) as His body in inseparable union with theWhole. So the word 'Brahman' can, according to the needs of each context, be used to indicate the Supreme Being, the Atman, or Prakrti:In verse 24 it has been used in all these senses. See Introduction].to 'the oblation'. That by which an offering is given, such as a ladle, is an Arpana. It is called Brahman because it is an effect of Brahman, Brahman being the material cause of the universe. 'Brahmarpanam' is the oblation, of which the instrument is Brahman. The oblation, just like the instrument with which it is offered, is also Brahman. It is offered by the agent Brahman into the fire of Brahman. He is the Brahma-karma-samadhi who contemplates thus on all acts as filled with the Supreme Brahman or as having the Supreme Brahman as the Self. He who contemplates on Brahman as the Soul of all actions, reaches Brahman alone, as his own self has the Supreme Brahman as Its Self. The meaning is that the individual self - which is Brahman becauseof Its having Brahman as Its Self - has to realise Its own real nature. All actions performed by an aspirant for release have the form of knowledge because of their association with the contemplation of the Supreme Brahman as their self. They are a direct means for the vision of the self without the meditation of Jnana Yoga.  
136 एवं कर्मणो ज्ञानाकारतां प्रतिपाद्य कर्मयोगभेदान् आह -दैवं देवार्चनरूपं यज्ञम् अपरे कर्मयोगिनः पर्युपासते सेवन्ते; तत्र एव निष्ठां कुर्वन्ति इत्यर्थः ।अपरे ब्रह्माग्नौ यज्ञं यज्ञेन एव उपजुह्वति । यज्ञं यज्ञरूपं ब्रह्मात्कम् आज्यादिद्रव्यं यज्ञेन यज्ञसाधनभूतेन स्रुगादिना जुह्वति । अत्र यज्ञशब्दो हविःस्रुगादियज्ञसाधने वर्तते । ब्रह्मार्पणं ब्रह्म हविः इति न्यायेन यागहोमयोर्निष्ठां कुर्वन्ति । 25 । Thus, Sri Krshna, after explaining how Karma takes the form of knowledge, now speaks of the various kinds of Karma Yoga.Some Karma Yogins resort to the sacrifice relating to gods, i.e., the sacrifice which takes the form of worshipping gods. The meaning is thatthey have steadfast devotion only in this. 'Others offer sacrifice into the fire of - Brahman solely by means of sacrifice.' Here the term, 'sacrifice' is used in the sense of the oblation, the ladle etc., required for performinga sacrifice and therefore they are said to constitute 'sacrificing'. These are of the nature of Brahman. 'Offer by means of sacrifice' indicates the ladle and other implements for the accomplishment of sacrifice.  
137 अन्ये श्रोत्रादीनाम् इन्द्रियाणां संयमने प्रयतन्ते । शब्दादीन् विषयान् अन्ये योगिनः इन्द्रियाणांशब्दादिविषयप्रवणतानिवारणे प्रयतन्ते । 26 । Others endeavour towards the restraint of the senses like ear and the rest,i.e., keep themselves away from the objects pleasing to the senses. OtherYogins endeavour to prevent the attachment of the senses to sound and other objects of the senses, i.e., they abstain from the sense-objects even when they are allowed to be near, by the discriminative process of belittling their value and enjoyable nature.  
138 अन्ये ज्ञानदीपिते मनः संयमयोगाग्नौ सर्वाणि इन्द्रियकर्माणि प्राणकर्माणि च जुह्वाति - मनसाइन्द्रियप्राणानां कर्मप्रवणतानिवारणे प्रयतन्ते इत्यर्थः । 27 । Some again offer as oblations all the functions of the senses, the activities of the vital breath etc., into the fire of Yoga of restraint of the mind kindled by knowledge. They endeavour to prevent the mind from getting attached to the functions of the senses and vital breaths. That is, by contemplating on the self they sublimate these energies and overcome even the lurking subtle desires for them.  
139 केचित् कर्मयोगिनो द्रव्ययज्ञाः; न्यायतो द्रव्याणि आदाय देवार्चने प्रयतन्ते, केचित् च दानेषु,केचित् च यागेषु, केचित् च होमेषु, एते सर्वे द्रव्ययज्ञाः ।केचित् तपोयज्ञाः कृच्छ्रचान्द्रायणोपवासादिषु निष्ठां कुर्वन्ति, योगयज्ञाः च अपरे पुण्यतीर्थ-पुण्यस्थानप्राप्तिषु निष्ठां कुर्वन्ति । इह योगशब्दः कर्मनिष्ठाभेदप्रकरणात् तद्विषयः ।केचित् स्वाध्यायपराः स्वाध्यायाभ्यासपराः, केचित्तदर्थज्ञानाभ्यासपराः यतयः यतनशीलाः,संशितव्रताः दृढसंकल्पाः । 28 । Some Karma Yogins perform the sacrifice of material objects. Some worship the gods with materials honestly acquired. Some practise charity, some engage themselves in sacrifices and in making oblations into the sacred fire. All these perform sacrifice with material objects. Some do the sacrifice of austerity by devoting themselves to Krcchra,Candrayana, fast, etc. Others perform the sacrifice of Yoga. Some devote themselves to making pilgrimages to sacred sanctuaries and holy places. Here the term Yoga means pilgrimages to sacred sanctuaries and holy places as the context relates to aspects of Karma Yoga. Some aredevoted to recitation of Vedic texts and some to learning their meaning. They are all devoted to the practice of self-control and of strict vows, i.e., they are men of steady resolution.  
140 अपरे कर्मयोगिनः प्राणायामेषु निष्ठां कुर्वन्ति । ते च त्रिविधाः पूरकरेचककुम्भकभेदेन ।अपाने जुह्वति प्राणम् इति पूरकः, प्राणे अपानम् इति रेचकः, प्राणापानगती रुद्ध्वा प्राणान्प्राणेषु जुह्वति इति कुम्भकः । प्राणायामपरेषु त्रिषु अपि अनुषज्यते नियताहारा इति ।द्रव्ययज्ञप्रभृतिप्राणायामपर्यन्तेषु कर्मयोगभेदेषु स्वसमीहितेषु प्रवृत्ता एते सर्वे 'सहयज्ञैः प्रजाः सृष्ट्वा' (3।10) इति अभिहितमहायज्ञपूर्वकनित्नैमित्तिककर्मरूपयज्ञविदः, तन्निष्ठाः, तत एव क्षपितकल्मषाः । 29-30 । Other Karma Yogins are devoted to the practice of breath control. They are of three types because of the differences in inhalation, exhalation and stoppage of breath. Puraka (inhalation) is that in which the inward breath is sacrificed in the outward breath. Recaka (exhalation) is that when the outward breath is sacrificed in the inward breath. Kumbhaka (stoppage of breath) is that when the flow of both inward and outward breaths is stopped. The clause, restricting of diet, applies to all the three types ofpersons devoted to the control of breath.All these, according to their liking and capacity are engaged in performing the various kinds of Karma Yoga beginning from the sacrifice of material objects to the control of breath. They know and are devoted to sacrifices comprising obligatory and occasional rituals preceded by the performance of 'the great sacrifices' (Panca-Maha-Yajna),as alluded to in 'Creating men along with the sacrifices' (3.10). Because of this only, their sins are done away with. Those who are engaged in Karma Yoga by sustaining their bodies only by the ambrosia of sacrificial remains will go to the eternal Brahman. 'Go to Brahman' here means realise the self which has Brahman for Its soul.  
141 यज्ञशिष्टामृतेन शरीरधारणं कुर्वन्त एव कर्मयोगे व्यापृताः सनातनं च ब्रह्म यान्ति । अयज्ञस्यमहायज्ञादिपूर्वकनित्यनैमित्तिककर्मरहितस्य न अयं लोकः न प्राकृतलोकः प्राकृतलोकसम्बन्धि-धर्मार्थकामाख्यः पुरुषार्थः न सिध्यति; कुतः इतः अन्यः मोक्षाख्यः पुरुषार्थः । परमपुरुषार्थतयामोक्षस्य प्रस्तुतत्वात् तदितरपुरुषार्थः 'अयं लोकः' इति निर्दिश्यते स हि प्राकृतः । 31 । He 'who offers no sacrifices,' i.e., he who does not devote himself to obligatory and occasional actions, preceded by the performance of the 'great sacrifices' etc., will not be able to achieve human ends which are associated with the material world and are called by the names of virtue,wealth and worldly satisfactions. How then can the man's supreme end called release (Moksha), which is other than these, be attained? As Moksha, man's supreme end, has been mentioned, other objectives different from it, are named 'this world.' That is, indeed the material world.[Perhaps the idea is that all types of sacrificers should perform the Panca-Maha-Yajnas, and take the remnants of it as their daily food. Only in this way can we give some meaning to 'ambrosial food' connected with the performance of all the various kinds of sacrifice mentioned in the above verses.]  
142 एवं हि बहुप्रकाराः कर्मयोगाः ब्रह्मणो मुखे वितताः, आत्मयाथात्म्यावाप्तिसाधनतया स्थिताः तान् उक्तलक्षणानुक्तभेदान् कर्मयोगान् सर्वान् कर्मजान् विद्धि । अहरहः अनुष्ठीयमाननित्य-नैमित्तिककर्मानुष्ठानजान् विद्धि । एवं ज्ञात्वा यथोक्तप्रकारेण अनुष्ठाय विमोक्ष्यसे । 32 । Thus there are many kinds of Karma Yoga, which are spread out for the attainment of the Brahman. That means, they lead to the realisation of the true nature of the individual self. Know that all these are forms of Karma Yoga, which have been previously defined and diversified, as born of actions. That means, know them as resulting from occasional and obligatory rites performed day by day. Knowing thus, observing them in the manner prescribed, you will be released.  
143 अन्तर्गतज्ञानतया कर्मणो ज्ञानाकारत्वम् उक्तम्; तत्र अन्तर्गतज्ञाने कर्मणि ज्ञानांशस्य एव प्राधान्यम् आह - उभयाकारे कर्मणि द्रव्यमयाद् अंशाद् ज्ञानमयः अशं श्रेयान् । सर्वस्य कर्मणः तदितरस्य च अखिलस्य उपादेयस्य ज्ञाने परिसमाप्तेः ।तद् एवं सर्वैः साधनैः प्राप्यभूतं ज्ञानं कर्मान्तर्गतत्वेन अभ्यस्यते । तद् एव हि अभ्यस्यमानं क्रमेण प्राप्यदशां प्रतिपद्यते । 33 । It has been stated that actions have the form of knowledge because of theinclusion of knowledge in them. Now Sri Krshna explains the predominance of the component of knowledge in such actions which include knowledge within themselves.Karma Yoga has two aspects - knowledge and material ingredients. Of these two, the component of knowledge is superior to the component of material ingredients. Knowledge is the culmination of all actions and of everything else, accessories and other things helpful. This knowledgealone, which is to be obtained by all means, is practised as comprehended in Karma Yoga. And this knowledge being regularly practised, reaches gradually what is ultimately attainable i.e., the vision of the self.  
144 तद् आत्मविषयं ज्ञानम् 'अविनाशि तु तद् विद्धि' (2।17) इति आरभ्य 'एषा तेऽभिहिता' (2।39)इत्यन्तेन मया उपदिष्टम् मदुक्तकर्मणि वर्तमानः त्वं विपाकानुगुणं काले प्राणिपातपरिप्रश्न-सेवाभिः विशदाकारं ज्ञानिभ्यो विद्धि ।साक्षात्कृतात्मस्वरूपाः तु ज्ञानिनः प्रणिपातादिभिः सेविताः ज्ञानबुभुत्सया परितः पृच्छतः तव आशयम् आलक्ष्य ज्ञानम् उपदेक्ष्यन्ति । 34 । This is the knowledge concerning the self that has been taught by Me in the verses beginning with 'Know that to be indestructible' (2.17) and ending with 'this has been given to you' (2.39). So engaged in appropriateactions, you can learn, according to the maturity of your competence, this wisdom from the wise, who will explain it to you, if you attend on them through prostrating and questioning and by serving them. The wise are those who have immediate apprehension (or vision) of the true natureof the self. Having been honoured by you through prostration etc., andobserving your mental disposition characterised by desire for knowledge which you have evinced by your questions, they will teach you this knowledge.  
145 आत्मयाथात्म्यविषयसाक्षात्काररूपस्य लक्षणम् आह -यद् ज्ञानं ज्ञात्वा पुनः एवं देहाद्यात्माभिमानरूपं तत्कृतं ममताद्यास्पदं च मोहं न यास्यसि,येन देवमनुष्याद्याकारेण अननुसंहितानि सर्वाणि भूतानि स्वात्मनि एव द्रक्ष्यसि, यतः तवअन्येषां च भूतानां प्रकृतिवियुक्तानां ज्ञानैकाकारतया साम्यम् । प्रकृतिसंसर्गदोषविनिर्मुक्तम् आत्मस्वरूपं सर्वं समम् इति च वक्ष्यते - 'निर्दोषं हि समं ब्रह्म' (गीता 5।19) इति ।अथो मयि सर्वाणि भूतानि अशेषेण द्रक्ष्यसि, मत्स्वरूपसाम्यात् च परिशुद्धस्य सर्वस्यआत्मवस्तुनः । 'इदं ज्ञानमुपाश्रित्य मम साधर्म्यमागताः' (गीता 14।2) इति हि वक्ष्यते, 'तथा विद्वान् पुण्यपापे विधूय, निरञ्जनः परमं साम्यमुपैति' (मु0उ0 3।1।3) इत्येवमादिषुनामरूपविनिर्मुक्तस्य आत्मवस्तुनः परं स्वरूपसाम्यम् अवगम्यते; अतः प्रकृतिविनिर्मुक्तंसर्वम् आत्मवस्तु परस्परं समं सर्वेश्वरेण च समम् । 35 । Sri Krshna now speaks of the characteristics of knowledge concerning the nature of the self, in the form of direct perception.Having which knowledge, you will not again fall into this delusion of mistaking the body etc., for the self, which is the cause of possessivenessetc. By this (knowledge) you will see in yourself all the beings which appear in diversity of forms such as gods, men etc.; for between you andother beings there is equality of nature when freed from the hold of Prakrti, as your self and all other selves have the form of knowledge as far as their essence is concerned. Sri Krshna will later on instruct that thenature of the self, dissociated from the evil of contact with Prakrti, is equal in all beings. 'For faultless Brahman (individual self) is alikeeverywhere; therefore, abide in Brahman' (5.19). And then you will see all beings without any exception in Me, because of the similarity of nature of the pure selves with one another and with My nature. For Sri Krsna will teach later on:'Resorting to this knowledge and partaking of My nature' (14.5). So the equality of the selves, devoid of name and form, with the nature of the Supreme, is known from the texts like: 'Then the wise, shaking off good and evil, stainless, attain supreme equality' (Mul}.U., 3.1.3). Thereforeall selves dissociated from Prakrti are equal in nature to one another and equal in nature to the Lord of all. [The idea is that blissfulness is the basic nature of all selves. Blissfulness (Ananda) is the nature of the Supreme Being also. Equality contemplated is in this respect only, but not in power of creation, which belongs only to Isvara].  
146 यदि अपि सर्वेभ्यः पापकृत्तमः असि सर्वं पूर्वार्जितं वृजिनरूपं समुद्रम् आत्मविषयज्ञानरूपप्लवेन एव संतरिष्यसि । 36 । Even though you be the most sinful of all sinners, you will completely cross over the sea of sins previously accumulated, with the boat of knowledge concerning the self.  
147 सम्यक् प्रवृद्ध अग्निः इन्धनसमुच्चयम् इव आत्मयाथात्म्यज्ञानरूपः अग्निः जीवात्मगतम्अनादिकलप्रवृत्तानेककर्मसञ्चयं भस्मीकरोति । 37 । The fire of knowledge concerning the real nature of the self reduces to ashes the collection of endless Karmas accumulated from beginningless times, just as a well-kindled fire reduces to ashes a bundle of firewood.  
148 यस्माद् आत्मज्ञानेन सदृशं पवित्रं शुद्धिकरम् इह जगति वस्त्वन्तरं न विद्यते; तस्मादात्मज्ञानंसर्वं पापं नाशयति इत्यर्थः । तत् तथाविधं ज्ञानं यथोपदेशमहरहरनुष्ठीयमानं ज्ञानाकारकर्मयोगेनसंसिद्धः कालेन स्वात्मनि स्वयमेव लभते । 38 । Nothing here in this world purifies like this knowledge; for the knowledge of the self destroys all evil. He who has reached perfection by practising Karma Yoga in its form of knowledge daily in the manner taught, in due time, of his own accord, attains it, i.e., knowledge concerning his own self.  
149 तद् एव स्पष्टम् आह -एवम् उपदेशाद् ज्ञानं लब्ध्वा च उपदिष्टज्ञानवृद्धौ श्रद्वावान् तत्परः तत्र एव नियमितमनाःतदितरविषयात् संयतेन्द्रियः अचिरेण कालेन उक्तलक्षणविपाकदशापन्नं ज्ञानं लभते ।तथाविधं ज्ञानं लब्ध्वा परां शान्तिम् अचिरेण अधिगच्छति परं निर्वाणं प्राप्नोति । 39 । Sri Krshna expounds the same lucidly thus:After attaining knowledge through instruction in the manner described, he must have firm faith in it and the possibility of its development into ripe knowledge. He must be intent on it, i.e., his mind must be focussed thereupon. He must control his senses and keep them away from all theirobjects. Soon will he then reach the aforesaid state of maturity and obtain knowledge. Soon after attaining such kind of knowledge, he will reach supreme peace, i,e., he attains the supreme Nirvana (realisation of the self).  
150 अज्ञः एवम् उपदेशलब्धज्ञानरहितः उपदिष्टज्ञानवृद्ध्युपाये च अश्रद्दधानः अत्वरमाणः उपदिष्टे च ज्ञाने संशयात्मा संशयितमना विनश्यति, नष्टो भवति । अस्मिन् उपदिष्टेआत्मयाथात्म्यविषये ज्ञाने संशयात्मनः अयम् अपि प्राकृतलोको न अस्ति, न च परः,धर्मार्थकामादिपुरुषार्थाः च न सिद्ध्यन्ति, कुतो मोक्ष इत्यर्थः ।शास्त्रीयकर्मसिद्धिरूपत्वात् सर्वेषां पुरुषार्थानां शास्त्रीयकर्मजन्यसिद्धेः च देहातिरिक्तात्म-निश्चयपूर्वकत्वात्; अतः सुखलवभागित्वम् आत्मनि संशयात्मनो न संभवति । 40 । 'The ignorant,' i.e., one devoid of knowledge received through instruction, 'the faithless' or one who has no faith in developing this knowledge taught to him, i.e., who does not strive to progress quickly, and 'the doubting one,' i.e., one who is full of doubts in regard to the knowledge taught - such persons perish, are lost. When this knowledgetaught to him about the real nature of the self is doubted, then he loses this material world as also the next world. The meaning is that the ends of man, such as Dharma, Artha and Kama which constitute the materialends or fulfilments, are not achieved by such a doubting one. How then can man's supreme end, release be achieved by such a doubting one? For all the ends of human life can be achieved through the actions whichare prescribed by the Sastras, but their performance, requires the firm conviction that the self is different from the body. Therefore, even a littlehappiness does not come to the person who has a doubting mind concerning the self.  
151 यथोपदिष्टयोगेन संन्यस्तकर्माणं ज्ञानाकारतापन्नकर्माणं यथोपदिष्टेन च आत्मज्ञानेन आत्मनि संछिन्नसंशयम् आत्मवन्तं मनस्विनम् उपदिष्टार्थे दृढावस्थितमनसं बन्धहेतुभूतप्राचीनानन्त-कर्माणि न निबध्नन्ति । 41 । The countless ancient Karmas which constitute the cause of bondage, do not bind him who has renounced actions through Karma Yoga in the manner explained before, who has sundered all doubts concerning the self by the knowledge of the self in the manner explained before, and who is of steady mind, i.e., unshakable, with the mind focussed steadily on the meaning that has been set forth.  
152 तस्माद् अनाद्यज्ञानसंभूतं हृत्स्थम् आत्मविषयं संशयं मया उपादिष्टेन आत्मज्ञानासिना छित्त्वा मया उपदिष्टं कर्मयोगम् आतिष्ठ तदर्थम् उत्तिष्ठ भारत इति । 42 । Therefore, after sundering this doubt concerning theself, born of beginningless ignorance and present in the heart, by the sword of the knowledge of the self in the manner explained before, practise the Karma Yoga taught by Me. For that, rise up, O Arjuna.  
