548 अतीतेन अध्यायद्वयेन अभ्युदयनिःश्रेयसः साधनभूतं वैदिकम् एव यज्ञतपोदानादिकं कर्म, न अन्यत्, वैदिकस्य च कर्मणः सामान्यलक्षणं प्रणवान्वयः, तत्र मोक्षाभ्युदयसाधनयोः भेदः तत्सच्छब्दनिर्दिश्यानिर्दिश्यत्वेन, मोक्षसाधनं च कर्मफलाभिसन्धिरहितं यज्ञादिकम्, तदारम्भः च सत्त्वोद्रेकाद् भवति, सत्त्ववृद्धिः च सात्त्विकाहारसेवया इति उक्तम् । अनन्तरं मोक्षसाधनतया निर्दिष्टयोः त्यागसंन्यासयोः ऐक्यं त्यागस्य संन्यासस्य च स्वरूपम्, भगवति सर्वेश्वरे च सर्वकर्मणां कर्तृत्वानुसन्धानम्, सत्त्वरजस्तमसां कार्यवर्णनेन सत्त्वगुणस्यावश्योपादेयत्वम्, स्ववर्णोचितानां कर्मणां परमपुरुषाराधनभूतानां परमपुरुषप्राप्ति-निर्वर्तनप्रकारः कृत्स्नस्य गीताशास्त्रस्य सारार्थो भक्तियोग इति एते प्रतिपाद्यन्ते । तत्र तावत् त्यागसंन्यासयोः पृथक्त्वैत्कत्वनिर्णयाय स्वरूपनिर्णयाय च अर्जुनः पृच्छति - अर्जुन उवाच त्यागसंन्यासौ हि मोक्षसाधनतया विहितौ - 'न कर्मणा न प्रजया धनेन त्यागेनैके अमृतत्वमानशुः' (महाना0 8।14) 'वेदान्तविज्ञानसुनिश्चितार्थाः संन्यासयोगाद्यतयः शुद्धसत्त्वाः । ते ब्रह्मलोकेषु परान्तकाले परामृताः परिमुच्यन्ति सर्वे ।।' (मु0 उ0 3।2।6) इत्यादिषु । अस्य संन्यासस्य त्यागस्य च तत्त्वं याथात्म्यं पृथग् वेदितुम् इच्छामि । अयम् अभिप्रायः - किम् एतौ संन्यासत्यागशब्दौ पृथगर्थौ, उत एकार्थौ एव? यदा पृथगर्थौ, तदा अनयोः पृथक्त्वेन स्वरूपं वेदितुम् इच्छामि । एकत्वे अपि तस्य स्वरूपं वक्तव्यम् इति । 1 । Liberation through RenunciationIn the preceding two chapters, the following topics were treated: (1). Vedic actions, such as sacrifices, austerities, gifts etc., alone constitute the means for prosperity and final release. (2). The general characteristic of all Vedic acts is their connection with the Pranava (Om-kara). (3). Of these, there is a distinction made between the means for final release and the means for prosperity, since they are designated respectively by the terms Tat and Sat. (4). The means of liberation is acts that are free from the desire for fruits. (5). Their performance is possible by the preponderance of Sattva. (6). The increase of Sattva is effected by the use of Sattvika food. Then, in the 18th Chapter, the chapter now dealt with, these are further elucidated: (1). The identity between abnegation (Tyaga) and renunciation (Sannyasa) which are described as the means for liberation. (2). The nature of abnegation (Tyaga). (3). Attributing the agency of all actions to the Lord, the ruler of all. (4). The necessity of Sattva Guna by an elaborate description of the effects of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas. (5). The way by which the Supreme Person is attained through acts appropriate to one's own station in life and constituting the worship of the Supreme Person. (6). Bhakti Yoga which is the essential teaching of the whole of the Gita-Sastra. Arjuna first asks whether Tyaga and Sannyasa are different or identical and what their nature is:Both Sannyasa and Tyaga as a means for release are enjoined in such Srutis: 'Not by rituals, nor by progeny, nor by wealth but by Tyaga alonedo some attain immortality...' (Ma.Na.5.14). 'Ascertaining the truth about the Supreme Reality from a knowledge of Vedanta, and becoming purified in mind by the means of Sannyasa Yoga, these Yatis (ascetics), at the dissolution of their bodies, attain the Lord who is higher than the freed selves and become liberated from bondage' (Man.U.3.2.6). I want to know separately the truth, viz., whether Tyaga and and Sannyasa are synonymous or not. The import is this. Do these two terms Sannyasa and Tyaga have different meanings or do they signify the same thing? If they signify different things, I want to know their different natures. If they are synonymous, their identical nature should be elucidated.  
549 अथ अनयोः एकम् एव स्वरूपम्, तत् च ईदृशम् इति निर्णेतुं वादिविप्रतिपत्तिं दर्शयन् श्रीभगवानुवाच - श्रीभगवानुवाचकेचन विद्वांसः काम्यानां कर्मणां न्यासं स्वरूपत्यागं संन्यासं विदुः, केचित् च विचक्षणाः नित्यानां नैमित्तिकानां काम्यानां च सर्वेषां कर्मणां फलत्याग एव मोक्षशास्त्रेषु त्यागशब्दार्थः इति प्राहुः । तत्र शास्त्रीयः त्यागः काम्यकर्मस्वरूपविषयः, सर्वकर्मफलविषयः, इति विवादं प्रदर्शयन् एकत्र संन्यासशब्दम् इतरत्र त्यागशब्दं प्रयुक्तवान्, अतः त्यागसंन्यासशब्दयोः एकार्थत्वम् अङ्गीकृतम् इति ज्ञायते । तथा 'निश्चयं शृणु मे तत्र त्यागे भरतसत्तम ।' (18।4) इति त्यागशब्देन एव निर्णयवचनात् । 'नियतस्य तु संन्यासः कर्मणो नोपपद्यते । मोहात्तस्य परित्यागस्तामसः परिकीर्तितः ।।' (18।7)अनिष्टमिष्टं मिश्रं च त्रिविधं कर्मणः फलम् । भवत्यत्यागिनां प्रेत्य न तु संन्यासिनां क्वचित् ।। (18।12) इति परस्परपर्यायतादर्शनात् च तयोः एकार्थत्वं प्रतीयते, इति निश्चीयते । 2 । Then, in order to prove that the nature of both is identical and that it is such and such, the Lord explains, showing the disagreements among some disputants.Some scholars understand that Sannyasa is complete relinquishment of desire-prompted acts. Some other wise men say that the meaning of the term Tyaga, according to the Sastras dealing with release, is relinquishment of the fruits not only of all desiderative (Kamya), but also of obligatory and occasional duties. Here, the problem is, whether the Tyaga taught in the Sastras concern desiderative acts themselves, or fruits of all acts. Sri Krshna has used the terms Sannyasa in one place and Tyaga elsewhere. From this it is understood that Sri Krshna uses the terms Tyaga and Sannyasa as synonyms.Likewise, the decisive teaching is about Tyaga alone in the statement: 'Hear My decision, O Arjuna, about Tyaga' (18.4). That the terms are synonymously used to denote the same sense, is conclusively established from such passagesas: 'But the renunciation (Sannyasa) of obligatory work is not proper. Abandonment (Tyaga) of it through delusion isdeclared to be Tamasika' (18.7); and 'To those who have not renounced the fruits of actions, threefold are the consequences after death - undesirable, desirable and mixed. But to those who have renounced, none whatsoever' (18.12).  
550 एके मनीषिणः कापिला वैदिकाः च तन्मतानुसारिणो रागादिदोषवद् बन्धत्वात् सर्वं यज्ञादिकं कर्म मुमुक्षुणा त्याज्यम् इति आहुः । अपरे पण्डिता यज्ञादिकं कर्म न त्याज्यम् इति प्राहुः । 3 । Some sages, viz., the adherents of Kapila and those Vaidikas who agree with his creed, contend that all acts such as sacrifices etc., should be renounced by aspirants for release, as they bind even as desires and othersimilar defects tend to bind. Other learned men say that acts likesacrifices etc., should not be renounced.  
551 तत्र एवं वादिविप्रतिपन्ने त्यागे त्यागविषयं निश्चयं मे मत्तः शृणु । त्यागः क्रियमाणेषु एव वैदिकेषु कर्मसु फलविषयतया, कर्मविषयतया, कर्तृत्वविषयतया च पूर्वम् एव हि मया त्रिविधःसंप्रकीर्तितः - 'मयि सर्वाणि कर्मणि संन्यस्याध्यात्मचेतसा । निराशीर्निर्ममो भूत्वा युध्यस्व विगतज्वरः ।।' (3।30) इति । कर्मजन्यं स्वर्गादिकं फलं मम न स्याद् इति फलत्यागः । मदीयफलसाधनतया मदीयम् इदं कर्म इति कर्मणि ममतायाः परित्यागः कर्मविषयः त्यागः, सर्वेश्वरे कर्तृत्वानुसन्धानेन आत्मनः कर्तृतात्यागः कर्तृत्वविषयः त्यागः । 4 । Regarding contradictory versions on Tyaga among disputants, listen from Me My decision. Tyaga has been described by Me in respect of actions prescribed by the scriptures from three points of view: (1) as referring to fruits, (2) as referring to acts themselves and, (3) as referring to agency. It is contained in the statement, 'Surrendering all your actions to Me with a mind focussed on the self,' and 'Free from desire and selfishness and cured of fever - fight' (3.30). The renunciation of fruits consists in the following manner. 'Heaven and such other results arising from acts do not belong to Me.' Renunciation of acts is complete abandonment of the sense of possession in regard to one's acts. This sense of possession is of the following nature: 'Those acts are mine on account of their being the means for fruits which are to be mine.' Renunciation referring to agency is the renunciation of agency of oneself by ascribing the agency to the Lord of all.  
552 यज्ञदानतपःप्रभृति वैदिकं कर्म मुमुक्षुणा न कदाचिद् अपि त्याज्यम्, अपि तु आप्रयाणाद्अहरहः कार्यम् एव, कुतः? यज्ञदानतपःप्रभृतीनि वर्णाश्रमसम्बन्धीनि कर्माणि मनीषिणां मननशीलानां पावनानि । मननम् उपासनम् । मुमुक्षूणां यावज्जीवम् उपासनं कुर्वताम् उपासननिष्पत्तिविरोधिप्राचीनकर्मविनाशनानि इत्यर्थः । 5 । Acts such as sacrifices, gifts, austerities etc., enjoined in the Vedas should not be relinquished by the aspirant for release, but should be performed day after day until his death.Why?Acts like sacrifices, gifts and austerities associated with the different stations of life, are the means of purification for the wise, i.e., for those given to contemplation. Contemplation is worship. For the aspirants who perform such worship (Upasana) throughout their lives, they (sacrifices etc.,) are a help to erase the previous Karmas which stand in the way of the fulfilment of such worship.  
553 यस्मात् मनीषिणां यज्ञदानतपःप्रभृतीनि पावनानि, तस्माद् उपासनवद् एतानि अपि यज्ञादीनि कर्माणि मदाराधनरूपाणि सङ्गं कर्मणि ममतां फलानि च त्यक्त्वा अहरहः आप्रयाणाद् उपासननिर्वृत्तये मुमुक्षुणा कर्तव्यानि इति मम निश्चितम् उत्तमं मतम् । 6 । Since sacrifices, gifts, austerities etc., are the means for the purification of the wise, therefore, it is My decided and final view that they should be performed as a part of my worship until one's death, renouncing attachment, viz., possessiveness towards actions and their fruits.  
554 नियतस्य नित्यनैमित्तिकस्य महायज्ञादेः कर्मणः संन्यासः त्यागो न उपपद्यते । 'शरीरयात्रापि च ते न प्रसिद्ध्येदकर्मणः ।' (3।8) इति शरीरयात्राया एव असिद्धेः । शरीरयात्रा हि यज्ञशिष्टाशनेन निर्वर्त्यमाना सम्यग् ज्ञानाय प्रभवति । अन्यथा 'भुञ्जते ते त्वघं पापाः' (3।13) इति अयज्ञशिष्टाघरूपाशनाप्यायनं मनसो विपरीतज्ञानाय भवति । 'अन्नमयं हि सोम्य मनः' (छा0 उ0 6।5।4) इति अन्नेन हि मन आप्यायते । 'आहारशुद्धौ सत्त्वशुद्धिः सत्त्वशुद्धौ ध्रुवा स्मृतिः । स्मृतिलम्भे सर्वग्रन्थीनां विप्रमोक्षः' (छा0 उ0 7।26।2) इति ब्रह्मसाक्षात्काररूपं ज्ञानम् आहारशुद्ध्यायत्तमिति श्रूयते । तस्मात् महायज्ञादिनित्यनैमित्तिकं कर्म आप्रायाणात् ब्रह्मज्ञानाय एव उपादेयम् इति तस्य त्यगो न उपपद्यते । एवं ज्ञानोत्पादिनः कर्मणो बन्धकत्वमोहात् परित्यागः तामसः परिकीर्तितः । तमोमूलः त्यागः तामसः, तमःकार्याज्ञानमूलत्वेन त्यागस्य तमोमूलत्वम् । तमो हि अज्ञानस्य मूलम् 'प्रमादमोहौ तमसो भवतोऽज्ञानमेव च ।।' (14।17) इति अत्र उक्तम् । अज्ञानं तु ज्ञानविरोधिविपरीतज्ञानम् । तथा च वक्ष्यते - 'अधर्मं धर्ममिति या मन्यते तमसावृता । सर्वार्थान्विपरीतांश्च बुद्धिः सा पार्थ तामसी ।।' (18।32) इति । अतो नित्यनैमित्तिकादेः कर्मणः त्यागो विपरीतज्ञानमूल एव इत्यर्थः । 7 । Obligatory acts consist of daily and occasional ceremonies like the five great sacrifices; their abandonment is not proper, for without actions even the sustenance of the body would be impossible, as already stated: 'From no-work, not even the body can be sustained' (3.8). The sustenence of the body by eating the sacrificial remnants produces perfect knowledge. Otherwise, as declared in the statement, 'But the sinful ones eat sin' (3.13). The satisfaction that comes by eating food which is not the remnant of sacrifice and which is therefore of the form of sin, is productive of erroneous knowledge in the mind. For, as declared in the Sruti, 'The mind consists of food' (Cha.U.6.5.4), the mind is sustained by food. Also, there is the Sruti text, 'When the food is pure, the mind becomes pure; when the mind is pure, remembrance becomes firmly fixed; and when remembrance is acquired, there is release from all knots of the heart' (Ibid.7.26.2). It is therefore proved by the Sruti that knowledge of the form of direct perception of Brahman, is dependent on the purity of food. Hence the great sacrifices and such other obligatory and occasional rites are worthy of adoption till one's death, as they help inthe knowledge of the Brahman. The renunciation of these is therefore not proper. Thus, the, relinquishment of these acts which produce knowledge through the delusion that they bind the self, is rooted in Tamas.Tamasika renunciation has its roots in Tamas. Since such renunciation has its roots in ignorance which is the effect of Tamas, such renunciationis said to have its roots in Tamas. For Tamas is the root of ignorance as has been stated: 'From Tamas arise negligence and delusion, and also,ignorance' (14.17). Ignorance is erroneous knowledge which is antagonistic to right knowledge. So, it will be taught, 'That reason which, enveloped in Tamas, regards wrong as right, and which reverses every value, O Arjuna, is Tamasika' (18.32). It is for this reason that the renunciation of obligatory and occasional actions are said to have their roots in erroneous knowledge.  
555 यद्यपि परम्परया मोक्षसाधनभूतं कर्म तथापि दुःखात्मकद्रव्यार्जनसाध्यत्वात् बह्वायासरूपतया कायक्लेशकरत्वात् च मनसः अवसादकरम् इति तद्भीत्या योगनिष्पत्तये ज्ञानाभ्यास एव यतनीय इति यो महायज्ञाद्याश्रमकर्म परित्यजेत्, स राजसं रजोमूलं त्यागं कृत्वा तद् अयथावस्थितशास्त्रार्थरूपम् इति ज्ञानोत्पत्तिरूपं त्यागफलं न लभेत् । 'अयथावत्प्रजानाति बुद्धिः सा पार्थ राजसी ।।' (18।31) इति हि वक्ष्यते । न हि कर्म दृष्टद्वारेण मनः प्रसादहेतुः । अपि तु भगवत्प्रसादद्वारेण । 8 । Although actions constitute the indirect means for release, yet they produce mental depression, since they can be done only by collecting materials involving painful effort and since they cause bodily strain on account of their requiring strenuous exertion. If, on account of such fear,one decides that the practice of knowledge alone should be tried for perfection in Yoga, and abandons actions like the great sacrifices applicable to one's station in life, he practises renunciation rooted in Rajas. Since that is not the meaning of the Sastras, one cannot win the fruit of renunciation in the form of the rise of knowledge. So it will beshown further on: 'That reason by which one erroneously knows, O Arjuna, is Rajasika' (18.31). In fact, actions do not directly cause purity of the mind but indirectly by winning the grace of God.  
556 नित्यनैमित्तिकमहायज्ञादिवर्णाश्रमविहितं कर्म मदाराधनरूपतया कार्यं स्वयंप्रयोजनम् इति मत्वा सङ्गं कर्मणि ममतां फलं च त्यक्त्वा यत् क्रियते स त्यागः सात्त्विको मतः स सत्त्वमूलः । यथावस्थितशास्त्रार्थज्ञानमूल इत्यर्थः । सत्त्वं हि यथावस्थितवस्तुज्ञानम् उत्पादयति इति उक्तम् - 'सत्त्वात् सञ्जायते ज्ञानम्' (14।27) इति । वक्ष्यते च - 'प्रवृत्तिं च निवृत्तिं च कार्याकार्ये भयाभये । बन्धं मोक्षं च या वेत्ति बुद्धिः सा पार्थ सात्त्विकी ।।' (18।30) इति । 9 । When rites like obligatory and occasional ceremonies and the great sacrifices enjoined on one's station and stage in life, are practised for their own sake, as worship of Myself and as a duty, relinquishing possessiveness and fruits - such abandonment is regarded as Sattvika. It is rooted in Sattva. The idea is that it is rooted in the knowledge of the meaning of the Sastras as it really is. That Sattva generates the knowledge of things as they really are, has been taught in: 'From Sattva arises knowledge' ( 14.7), and it will be further declared: 'That reason by which one knows action and renunciation, what ought to be done andwhat ought not to be done, fear and fearlessness, bondage and release, O Arjuna, is Sattvika' (18.30).  
557 एवं सत्त्वसमाविष्टो मेधावी यथावस्थिततत्त्वज्ञानः तत एव छिन्नसंशयः कर्मणि सङ्गफल-कर्तृत्वत्यागी न द्वेष्टि अकुशलं कर्म कुशले च कर्मणि न अनुषज्जते । अकुशलं कर्म अनिष्टफलम्, कुशलं च कर्म इष्टरूपस्वर्गपुत्रपश्वन्नादिफलम्, सर्वस्मिन् कर्मणि ममतारहितत्वात्, त्यक्तब्रह्मव्यतिरिक्तिसर्वफलत्वात्, त्यक्तकर्तृत्वात् च तयोः क्रियमाणयोः प्रीतिद्वेषौ न करोति । अनिष्टफलं पापं कर्म अत्र प्रामादिकम् अभिप्रेतम्, 'नाविरतो दुश्चरितान्नाशान्तो नासमाहितः । नाशान्तमानसो वापि प्रज्ञानेनैनमाप्नुयात् ।।' (कठ0 उ0 1।2।24) इति दुश्चरिताविरतेः ज्ञानोत्पत्तिविरोधित्वश्रवणात् । अतः कर्मणि कर्तृत्वसङ्गफलानां त्यागः शास्त्रीयः त्यागः न कर्मस्वरूपत्यागः । 10 । Thus, 'filled with Sattva,' endowed with right knowledge, i.e., with the knowledge of the reality as it is, and as a consequence of it 'having all doubts shattered' - he alone becomes a renouncer of attachment to work and the fruits of work. He 'neither hates works productive of harmfuleffects,' nor 'loves others productive of worldly prosperity'. Disagreeable acts are fraught with undesirable fruits; and agreeable acts bring about desirable results such as heaven, sons, cows, food etc. On account of his renouncing all results other than the Brahman and on account of hisrenouncing the sense of agency, he shows neither love nor hatred for above-mentioned types of works. Here 'sinful acts having undesirable fruits' are only such acts as are inadvertently performed. For it has been taught in the Srutis that not turning away from bad conduct is antagonistic to the production of knowledge. 'But one who has not ceased from bad conduct, who is not tranquil, is not composed, is not of peaceful mind, cannot obtain Him by knowledge' (Ka.U.1.2.24). Thus, ''the abandonment' according to the Sastras is, renunciation of the sense of agency, attachment and fruits of actions, and not total relinquishment of actions as such.  
558 तद् आह -न हि देहभृता ध्रियमाणशरीरेण कर्माणि अशेषतः त्यक्तुं शक्यम् देहधारणार्थानाम् अशनपानादीनां तदनुबन्धिनां च कर्मणाम् अवर्जनीयत्वात्, तदर्थं च महायज्ञाद्यनुष्ठानम् अवर्जनीयम् । यः तु तेषु महायज्ञादिकर्मसु फलत्यागी स एव 'त्यागेनैके अमृतत्वमानशुः' (महाना0 8।14) इत्यादिशास्त्रेषु त्यागी इति अभिधीयते । फलत्यागी इति प्रदर्शनार्थः, फलकर्तृत्वकर्मसङ्गानां त्यागी इति, 'त्रिविधः संप्रकीर्तितः' इति प्रक्रमात् । 11 । He explains this further:It is impossible for one who has a body and has to nourish it, 'to abandonaction entirely'; for eating, drinking etc., required for nourishing the bodyand other acts connected therewith are unavoidable. And for the same reason, the five great sacrifices etc., are also indispensable. He who hasgiven up the fruits of the five great sacrifices, is said to have renounced; this is referred to in the Srutis such as: 'Only through renunciation do some obtain immortality' (Ma.Na.8.14). Renunciation of fruits of actions is illustrative; it implies much more. It implies one who hasrenounced the fruits, agency and attachment to works, as the topic has been begun with the declaration: 'For abandonment (Tyaga) is declared to be of three kinds' (18.4).  
559 ननु कर्माणि अग्निहोत्रदर्शपूर्णमासज्योतिष्टोमादीनि महायज्ञादीनि च स्वर्गादिफलसम्बन्धितया शास्त्रैः विधीयन्ते । नित्यनैमित्तिकानाम् अपि 'प्राजापत्यं गृहस्थानाम्' (वि0 पु0 1।6।37) इत्यादिफलसम्बन्धितया एव हि चोदना । अतः तत्फलसाधनस्वभावतया अवगतानां कर्मणाम् अनुष्ठाने बीजावापादीनाम् इव अनभिसंहितफलस्य अपि इष्टानिष्टरूपफलसम्बन्धः अवर्जनीयः,अतो मोक्षविरोधिफलत्वेन मुमुक्षुणा न कर्म अनुष्ठेयम् इति, अत उत्तरम् आह -अनिष्टं नरकादिफलम्, इष्टं स्वर्गादि, मिश्रम् अनिष्टसंभिन्नं पुत्रपश्वन्नादि, एतत् त्रिविधं कर्मणः फलम् अत्यागिनां कर्तृत्वममताफलत्यागरहितानां प्रेत्य भवति, प्रेत्य कर्मोनुष्ठानोत्तरकालम् इत्यर्थः । न तु संन्यासिनां क्वचित् न तु कर्तृत्वादिपरित्यागिनां क्वचिद् अपि मोक्षविरोधि फलं भवति । एतद् उक्तं भवति - यद्यपि अग्निहोत्रमहायज्ञादीनि नित्यानि एव, तथापि जीवनाधिकार-कामाधिकारयोः इव मोक्षाधिकारे च विनियोगपृथक्त्वेन परिह्रियते, मोक्षविनियोगः च - 'तमेतं वेदानुवचनेन ब्राह्मणा विविदिषन्ति यज्ञेन दानेन तपसाऽनाशकेन' (बृ0 उ0 4।4।22) इत्यादिभिः इति । तद् एवं क्रियमाणेषु एव कर्मसु कर्तृत्वादिपरित्यागः शास्त्रसिद्धः संन्यासः, स एव च त्याग इति उक्तः । 12 । This statement may be questioned in the following manner: 'Agnihotra, the full moon and new moon sacrifices, Jyotishtoma etc., and also the five great sacrifices are enjoined by the Sastras only for the attainment oftheir results like heaven. They are not purposeless. Even the injunction with regard to obligatory and occasional ceremonies is enjoined because they yield results, as implied in the following passage: 'For householders,Prajapatya ceremony' (V.P.1.6.37). Therefore, as the performance of actions has to be understood as a means for attaining their respective results, the accruing of agreeable and disagreeable results is inevitable, even though they are performed without any desire for fruits, just as a seed sown must grow into a tree and bear fruit. Hence, actions ought not to be performed by an aspirant for release, because the results are incompatible with release. Sri Krshna answers such objections:The 'undesirable result' is Naraka etc., 'the desirable' is heaven etc., 'the mixed' is sons, cows, food etc., which are combined with some undesirable results. Those who have not renounced, namely, those who are devoid of renunciation of agenty, possessiveness and fruits - they meet with threefold consequences after death. The meaning of 'afterdeath' (Pretya) may be understood as subsequent to the performance of actions. But 'to those who have renounced, none whatsoever,' viz., to those who have relinquished the sense of agency etc., no such results antagonistic to release accrue. Here the purport is this: Agnihotra, the great sacrifices etc., are obligatory throughout life and are required for attaining the objects of desire; but in regard to release their application is different. Though externally they appear to be the same in their nature in both the conditions, they are different in their fruits by virtue of difference in application. Their application to release is seen in such textsas 'The Brahmanas desire to know Him by the study of the Vedas, by sacrifices, by gifts, by austerities conjoined with fasting' (Br.U.4.4.22). Here the performance of actions without sense of agency is enforced. Such giving up agency etc:, are relevant only with regard to acts that are actuallyperformed. Thus Sannyasa or renouncing of this kind is established in the Sastras. The same is also called Tyaga or giving up.  
560 इदानीं भगवति पुरुषोत्तमे अन्तर्यामिणि कर्तृत्वानुसंधानेन आत्मनि अकर्तृत्वानुसंधानप्रकारम् आह । तत एव फलकर्मणोः अपि ममतापरित्यागो भवति इति । परमपुरुषो हि स्वकीयेन जीवात्मना स्वकीयैः च करणकलेवरप्राणैः स्वलीलाप्रयोजनाय कर्माणि आरभते । अतो जीवात्मगतं क्षुन्निवृत्त्यादिकम् अपि फलं तत्साधनभूतं च कर्म परमपुरुषस्य एव -संख्या बुद्धिः, सांख्ये कृतान्ते यथावस्थिततत्त्वविषयया वैदिक्या बुद्ध्या अनुसंहिते निर्णये सर्वकर्मणां सिद्धये - उत्पत्तये प्रोक्तानि प़ञ्च एतानि कारणानि निबोध मे, मम सकाशात् अनुसंधत्स्व । वैदिकी हि बुद्धिः शरीरेन्द्रियप्राणजीवात्मोपकरणं परमात्मानम् एव कर्तारम् अवधारयति । 'य आत्मनि तिष्ठन्नात्मनोऽन्तरो यमात्मा न वेद, यस्यात्मा शरीरम्, य आत्मानमन्तरो यमयति, स त आत्मान्तर्याम्यमृतः (श0 प0 14।5।30) 'अन्तः प्रविष्टः शास्ता जनानां सर्वात्मा' (तै0 आ0 3।11।3) इत्यादिषु । 13 । Sri Krshna now explains the manner of realising that one is non-agent, by attributing all agency to God, who is the Supreme Person and the Inner Ruler. By cultivating this attitude, an aspirant can attain the renunciation of possessiveness with regard to actions and also their fruits.For it is the Supreme Person who performs all actions through theindividual selves who belong to Him. The organs, bodies and Pranas of embodied beings are His. They exist for the sake of His own sport as theonly purpose. Therefore, even the appeasement of hunger etc., and such other acts which affect the life of the individual souls and their works constitute only the means for accomplishing that purpose, namely, the sport of the Highest Purusha Himself. The purport of the argument is this: The analogy of seeds producing the tree and its fruits is not applicable to the actions of release-seekers. Their actions may look like those of fruit-seekers externally. But as mentally they do not entertain any such purpose, the consequence of their actions can be quite different. The purpose served by their actions is only affording sport for the Supreme Being.'Sankhya' means Buddhi (reasoning). 'Sankhya-krtanta' means that whichis determined after due deliberations by the Buddhi in accordance with the Vedas on the nature of the things as they are. Learn them from Me. There are five causes for the accomplishment of all actions. But the understanding according to the Vedas (Vaidiki-buddhi) is that the Supreme Self alone is the agent working through body, senses, Pranas and the individual self, as asserted in the following Srutis: 'He who, dwelling in the self, who rules the self from within your self, the Inner Ruler, immortal' (Br.U.Madh.3.7.22), and 'He who has penetrated theinterior, is the Ruler of all creatures and the Self of all' (Tai.A.,3.11.3).  
561 तद् इदम् आह -न्याय्ये शास्त्रसिद्धे विपरीते प्रतिषिद्धे वा सर्वस्मिन् कर्मणि शारीरे वाचिके मानसे च पञ्च एते हेतवः । अधिष्ठानं शरीरम्, अधिष्ठीयते जीवात्मना इति महाभूतसंघातरूपं शरीरम् अधिष्ठानम् । तथा कर्ता जीवात्मा, अस्य जीवात्मनः ज्ञातृत्वं कर्तृत्वं च - 'ज्ञोऽत एव' (ब्र0 सू0 2।3।18) 'कर्ता शास्त्रार्थवत्त्वात्' (ब0 सू0 2।3।33) इति च सूत्रोपपादितम् । करणं च पृथग्विधम् वाक्पाणिपादादिपञ्चकं समनस्कं कर्मेन्द्रियम्, पृथग्विधं कर्मनिष्पत्तौ पृथग्व्यापारम् । विविधाः च पृथक् चेष्टाः - चेष्टाशब्देन पञ्चात्मा वायुः अभिधीयते, तद्वृत्तिवाचिना, शरीरेन्द्रियधारकस्य प्राणापानादिभेदभिन्नस्य वायोः पञ्चात्मनो विविधा च चेष्टा विविधा वृत्तिः । दैवं च एव अत्र पञ्चमम्, अत्र कर्महेतुकलापे दैवं पञ्चमम् परमात्मा अन्तर्यामी कर्मनिष्पत्तौ प्रधानहेतुः इति अर्थः । उक्तं हि 'सर्वस्य चाहं हृदि सन्निविष्टो मत्तः स्मृतिर्ज्ञानमपोहनं च ।' (15।15) इति । वक्ष्यति च - 'ईश्वरः सर्वभूतानां हृद्देशेऽर्जुन तिष्ठति । भ्रामयन् सर्वभूतानि यन्त्रारूढानि मायया ।।' (18।61) इति । परमात्मायत्तं च जीवात्मनः कर्तृत्वम् - 'परात्तु तच्छुतेः' (ब्र0 सू0 2।3।41) इति उपपादितम् । ननु एवं परमात्मायत्ते जीवात्मनः कर्तृत्वे जीवात्मा कर्मणि अनियोज्यो भवति इति विधिनिषेध-शास्त्राणि अनर्थकानि स्युः । इदम् अपि चोद्यं सूत्रकारेण एव परिहृतम् । 'कृतप्रयत्नापेक्षस्तु विहितप्रतिषिद्धावैयर्थ्यादिभ्यः' (ब्र0 सू0 2।3।42) इति । एतद् उक्तं भवति - परमात्मना दत्तैः तदाधारैः च करणकलेवरादिभिः तदाहितशक्तिभिः स्वयं च जीवात्मा तदाधारः तदाहितशक्तिः सन् कर्मनिष्पत्तये स्वेच्छया करणाद्यधिष्ठानाकारं प्रयत्नं च आरभते, तदन्तः अवस्थितः परमात्मा स्वानुमतिदानेन तं प्रवर्तयति इति जीवस्य अपि स्वबुद्ध्या एव प्रवृत्तिहेतुत्वम् अस्ति । यथा गुरुतरशिलामहीरुहादिचलनादिफलप्रवृत्तिषु बहुपुरुषसाध्यासु बहूनां हेतुत्वं विधिनिषेधभाक्त्वं च इति । 14-15 । Sri Krshna now sets forth the five causes:For all actions, performed through body, words or mind, whether they be authorized by the Sastras or not, the causes are these five. (1) The body, which is a conglomeration of the 'great elements,' is known as the seat, since it is governed by the individual self. (2) The agent is the individual self. That this individual self is the knower and the agent is established in the Vedanta-Sutras: 'For this reason, (the individual self) is the knower' (2.3.18) and 'The agent, on account of the scripture having a purport' (2.3.33.). (3) The organs of various kinds are the five motor organs like that of speech, hands, feet etc., along with the mind. They are of Various kinds, viz. , they have different functions incompleting an action. (4) The different and distinctive functions of vital air - here the expression 'functions' (Ceshta) means several functions.Distinctive are the functions of this fivefold vital air which sustains the body and senses through its divisions of Prana, Apana etc. (5) Divinity is the fifth among these causes. The purport is this: Among these, which constitute the conglomeration of causes of work the Divinity is the fifth. It is the Supreme Self, the Inner Ruler, who is the main cause in completing the action.It has been already affirmed: 'I am seated in the hearts of all. From Me are memory, knowledge and their removal also' (15.15), and He will say further: 'The Lord, O Arjuna, lives in the heart of every being causing them to spin round and round by His power as if set on a wheel' (18.61). The agency of the individual self is dependent on the Supreme Self as established in the aphorism: 'But from the Supreme, because the scripture says so' (B.S.2.3.41).Now an objection may be raised in this way: If the agency of the individual self is dependent on the Supreme Self and the individual self cannot be charged with moral responsibility, then the scriptures containing injunctions and prohibitions become useless, as the individual self cannot be enjoined to act in regard to any action. The objection is disposed off by the author of the Vedanta-Sutras in the aphorism: 'But with a view to the effects made on account of the purposelessness of injunctions and prohibitions.' (2.3.42). The purport is this: By means of his senses, body etc., granted by the Supreme Self - having Him for their support, empowered by Him, and thus deriving power fromHirn - the individual self begins, of his own free will, the effort for directing the senses etc., for the purpose of performing actions conditioned by his body and organs. The individual self Itself, of Its own free will, is responsible for activity, since the Supreme Self, abiding within, causes It to act only by granting His permission, just as works such as moving heavy stones and timber are collectively the labour of many persons and they are together responsiblefor the effect. But each one of them (severally) also is responsible for it. In the same way each individual is answerable to Nature's law in the form of positive and negative commandments.  
562 एवं वस्तुतः परमात्मानुमतिपूर्वके जीवात्मनः कर्तृत्वे सति तत्र कर्मणि केवलम् आत्मानम् एव कर्तारं यः पश्यति, स दुर्मतिः विपरीतमतिः, अकृतबुद्धित्वात् - अनिष्पन्नयथावस्थितवस्तु-बुद्धित्वात् न पश्यति न यथावस्थितं कर्तारं पश्यति । 16 । In fact, the agency of the individual self is subject to the consent of Supreme Self; such being the case, if the 'individual self regards Itself as the agent,' It is of wicked or perverse mind. For, It does not perceive the agent as It really is, since It possesses an 'uncultivated understanding,' namely, an understanding which does not reveal the real state of affairs.  
563 परमपुरुषकर्तृत्वानुसन्धानेन यस्य भावः कर्तृत्वविशेषविषयो मनोवृत्तिविशेषो न अहंकृतो न अहमभिमानकृतः 'अहं करोमि' इति ज्ञानं यस्य न विद्यते इत्यर्थः । बुद्धिः यस्य न लिप्यते, अस्मिन् कर्मणि मम कर्तृत्वाभावाद् एतत् फलं न मया संबध्यते, न च मदीयम् इदं कर्म इति यस्य बुद्धिः जायते इत्यर्थः । स इमान् लोकान् युद्धे हत्वा अपि तान् न निहन्ति न केवलं भीष्मादीन् इत्यर्थः । ततः तेन युद्धाख्येन कर्मणा न निबध्यते, तत्फलं न अनुभवति इत्यर्थः । 17 ।  He who, through the contemplation of the agency of the Supreme Being,is free from the self-conceit, 'I alone do everything'; he whose understanding is not therefore tainted, and has come to be informed by the understanding; 'As I am not the agent of this work, its fruit is not connected with me; so this work does not belong to me' - such a person, though he slays all these men, not merely Bhishma, etc., does not slay them. Therefore, he is not bound by the actions known as battle. The meaning is that the fruits of such actions do not accrue to him.  
564 सर्वम् इदम् अकर्तृत्वाद्यनुसन्धानं सत्त्वगुणवृद्ध्या एव भवति इति सत्त्वस्य उपादेयताज्ञापनाय कर्मणि सत्त्वादिगुणकृतं वैषम्यं प्रपञ्चयिष्यन् कर्मचोदनाप्रकारं तावद् आह -ज्ञानं कर्तव्यकर्मविषयं ज्ञानम्, ज्ञेयं च कर्तव्यं कर्म, परिज्ञाता तस्य बोद्धा इति त्रिविधा कर्मचोदना, बोधबोद्धव्यबोद्धृयुक्तो ज्योतिष्टोमादिकर्मविधिः इत्यर्थः । तत्र बोद्धव्यरूपं कर्म त्रिविधं संगृह्यते करणं कर्म कर्ता इति । करणं साधनभूतं द्रव्यादिकम्, कर्म यागादिकम्, कर्ता अनुष्ठाता इति । 18 । Sri Krsna now teaches how action is induced. For this he differentiates actions generated by Sattva and the other Gunas. The object is to inculcate the desirability of the Sattvika type. For, only meditation on theself not being the agent, brings about the growth of Sattva.(i) 'Knowledge' means the knowledge about the acts which ought to be performed. (ii) The 'object of knowledge' is the act which ought to be performed.(iii) 'The knower' is the person who knows that act. The meaning is that the injunction to do acts, like Jyotishthoma etc., is acombination of knowledge, object of knowledge, and the knower. Among these, action itself, which is the object of knowledge, is briefly described as threefold - these being the instrument, action and the agent. The instrument forms the materials etc., which are the means. The action consists of the sacrifice etc. The agent is the performer.  
565 कर्तव्यकर्मविषयं ज्ञानम्, अनुष्ठीयमानं च कर्म, तस्यानुष्ठाता च सत्त्वादिगुणभेदतः त्रिधा एव प्रोच्यते । गुणसंख्याने गुणकार्यगणने यथावत् शृणु तानि अपि - तानि गुणतो भिन्नानि ज्ञानादीनि यथावत् शृणु । 19 । The knowledge of action which ought to be done, the act to be performed, and the performer of the act are threefold, each of them being divided in accordance with Sattva etc., Listen about these, which are differentiated according to the Gunas.  
566 ब्राह्मणक्षत्रियब्रह्मचारिगृहस्थादिरूपेण विभक्तेषु सर्वेषु भूतेषु कर्माधिकारिषु येन ज्ञानेन एकाकारम् आत्माख्यं भावं तत्र अपि अविभक्तं ब्राह्मणत्वाद्यनेकाकारेषु अपि भूतेषु सितदीर्घादिविभागवत्सु ज्ञानैकाकारं आत्मानं विभागरहितम् । अव्ययं व्ययस्वभावेषु अपि ब्राह्मणादिशरीरेषु अव्ययम् अविकृतं फलादिसङ्गानर्हं च कर्माधिकारवेलायाम् ईक्षते, तत् ज्ञानं सात्त्विकं विद्धि । 20 । The self (Atman), which is of the form of knowledge, is alike and uniform, though distinct, in all beings, even though they may externally, and from the point of view of duty, be distinguished as Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, householders, celibates, fair, tall etc. The immutable selves in all these perishing forms or bodies are unaffected by the fruits of actions. Such knowledge of the immutability of the self in all changing beings, is Sattvika.  
567 सर्वेषु भूतेषु ब्राह्मणादिषु ब्रह्मणाद्याकारपृथक्त्वेन आत्माख्यान् अपि भावान् नानाभूतान् सितदीर्घादिपृथक्त्वेन च पृथग्विधान् फलादिसंयोगयोग्यान् कर्माधिकारवेलायां यद् ज्ञानं वेत्ति तत् ज्ञानं राजसं विद्धि । 21 । Whatever knowledge perceives in Brahmana etc., at the time of work, the entity known as the Atman as of diverse nature because the bodies of those beings are tall or fair and are fit to attain the fruits of work - know that knowledge to be Rajasika. The point is this: It is not a condemnation of the plurality of Atman. The Atman, though distinct, isuniform everywhere. The bodily attributes do not affect it.The knowledge lacking this understanding is stigmatised as Rajasa.  
568 यत् तु ज्ञानम् एकस्मिन् कार्ये एकस्मिन् कर्तव्ये कर्मणि प्रेतभूतगणाद्याराधनरूपे अत्यल्पफले कृत्स्नफलवत् सक्तम् अहेतुकं वस्तुतः तु अकृत्स्नफलवत्तया तथाविधसङ्गहेतुरहितम्, अतत्त्वार्थवत् पूर्ववद् एव आत्मनि पृथक्त्वादियुक्ततया मिथ्याभूतार्थविषयम्, अत्यल्पफलं च प्रेतभूताद्याराधनरूपविषयत्वाद् अल्पं च, तद् ज्ञानं तामसम् उदाहृतम् । 22 । But that knowledge which clings to a 'single type of act' as what ought to be done, viz., act in the form of the worship of ghosts or evil spirits yielding very small fruits, as if it yielded - all fruits; that work 'not founded on any reason for having attachment,' because it is not a source of all fruits; 'untrue' because it is based on a false view of things such asseeing differentiation in the nature of the Atman; 'insignificant', because the worship of ghosts and evil spirits yields poor results - for such reasons knowledge of this kind is declared to be Tamasika.  
569 एवं कर्तव्यकर्मविषयज्ञानस्य अंधिकारवेलायाम् अधिकार्यंशेन गुणतः त्रैविध्यम् उक्त्वा अनुष्ठेयस्य कर्मणो गुणतः त्रैविध्यम् आह -नियतं स्ववर्णाश्रमोचितं सङ्गरहितं कर्तृत्वादिसङ्गरहितम्, अरागद्वेषतः कृतं कीर्तिरागाद् अकीर्तिद्वेषात् च न कृतम्, अदम्भेन कृतम् इत्यर्थः, अफलप्रेप्सुना अफलाभिसन्धिना कार्यम् इति एव कृतं यत् कर्म तत् सात्त्विकम् उच्यते । 23 । After having thus classified the threefold division of knowledge relating to work according to Gunas in respect of a person who is qualified for work, Sri Krshna explains the triple division of the acts that ought to be done, according to Gunas.'Obligatory act' is that which is appropriate to one's own station and stageof life. Doing it 'without attachment' means devoid of attachment to agency etc., and 'without desire or aversion' means that it is not done through desire to win fame and aversion to win notoriety, i.e., is performed without ostentation - when obligatory works are performed in the above-mentioned way by one who is not after their fruits, they are said to be Sattvika.  
570 यत् तु पुनः कामेप्सुना फलप्रेप्सुना साहंकारेण वा, वाशब्दः चार्थे, कर्तृत्वाभिमानयुक्तेन च, बहुलायासं यत् कर्म क्रियते, तत् राजसम् - 'बहुलायासम् इदं कर्म मया एव क्रियते' इत्येवंरूपाभिमानयुक्तेन यत् कर्म क्रियते तद् राजसम् इत्यर्थः । 24 । But whatever act is performed by one who seeks to gratify his desires, viz., by one who desires the results of his action and with the feeling of egoism, viz., has the misconceived notion that oneself is the agent; and with a great deal of effort-such an act is of the nature of Rajas. Here va (or) is used in the sense of ca (and). Whatever action is performed by one who possesses the misconceived notion, 'This action demanding enormous effort, is performed entirely by me' - it is said to be Rajasika.  
571 कृते कर्मणि अनुबद्ध्यमानं दुःखम् अनुबन्धः, क्षयः कर्मणि क्रियमाणे अर्थविनाशः, हिंसा तत्र प्राणिपीडा, पौरुषम् आत्मनः कर्मसमापनसामर्थ्यम्, एतानि अनवेक्ष्य अविमृश्य मोहात् परमपुरुषकर्तृत्वाज्ञानाद् यत् कर्म आरभ्यते क्रियते, तत् तामसम् उच्यते । 25 । 'Anubandha' or consequence is here the pain which follows when a work is performed. 'Loss' means loss of wealth involved in doing that act. 'Injury' is the pain caused to living beings when the work is carried out. 'Capacity' is the ability of completing the act. Whenever an act is begun without consideration of these and from delusion, viz., due to ignoring the agency of the Supreme Person - that act is said to be Tamasika.  
572 मुक्तसङ्गः फलसङ्गरहितः, अनहंवादी कर्तृत्वाभिमानरहितः, धृत्युत्साहसमन्वितः, आरब्धे कर्मणि यावत्कर्मसमाप्त्यवर्जनीयदुःखधारणं धृतिः, उत्साहः उद्युक्तचेतस्त्वम्, ताभ्यां समन्वितः, सिद्ध्यसिद्ध्योः निर्विकारः युद्धादौ कर्मणि तदुपकरणभूतद्रव्यार्जनादिषु च सिद्ध्यसिद्ध्योः अविकृतचित्तः कर्ता सात्त्विक उच्यते । 26 । 'Muktasangah' is one who is free from attachment to fruits. 'Anahamvadi'is one who is devoid of the feeling of being the agent. He is endued with'steadiness and zeal'.''Steadiness' is perseverance in regard to an act that has been begun in spite of the pain that is inevitable till the completion of the work. 'Zeal' is the possession of an active mind. One who is enduded with these, and whose mind remains firm, untouched by success and failure in war etc., and also in gathering the material requisites for the work onhand - such an agent is, of Sattvika nature.  
573 रागी यशोऽर्थी, कर्मफलप्रेप्सुः कर्मफलाथीं, लुब्धः कर्मापेक्षितद्रव्यव्ययस्वभावरहितः, हिंसात्मकः परान् पीडयित्वा तैः कर्म कुर्वाणः, अशुचिः कर्मापेक्षितशुद्धिरहितः, हर्षशोकान्वितः युद्धादौ कर्मणि जयादिसिद्ध्यसिद्ध्योःयोः हर्षशोकान्वितः कर्ता राजसः परिकीर्तितः । 27 । The 'passionate' doer is one who aspires for fame; 'who seeks the fruits of his acts' is one who longs for the fruits of his acts; the 'greedy' is he who does not spend the wealth required for the act; the 'harmful' is one, who, while acting, hurts others; the 'impure', is one who lacks the purityrequired for the act; who is moved by 'delight and grief' in war etc., is one who is elated or depressed by success or failure, in victory (or the opposite) a doer who fulfils these conditions is declared to be Rajasika.  
574 अयुक्तः शास्त्रीयकर्मायोग्यः विकर्मस्थः, प्राकृतः अनधिगतविद्यः, स्तब्धः अनारम्भशीलः, शठः, अभिचारादिकर्मरुचिः, नैष्कृतिकः वञ्चनपरः, अलसः आरब्धेषु अपि कर्मसु मन्दप्रवृत्तिः । विषादी अतिमात्रावसादशीलः, दीर्घसूत्री अभिचारादिकर्म कुर्वन् परेषु दीर्घकालवर्त्यनर्थ-पर्यालोचनशीलः, एवंभूतो यः कर्ता स तामसः । 28 । 'Ayukta' is the doer who is unqualified for acts enjoined by the Sastras; the meaning is that he is engaged in perverse acts; who is 'unrefined', means one uninstructed; who is 'stubborn ', means one who is not disposed to act; who is 'depraved' means one who has the taste for black magic etc; who is dishonest is one who is treacherous; who is 'indolent' is one who is not inclined to carry out actions undertaken; who is 'despondent' is one given to excessive despondency; and one who is 'dilatory', is a person who, while engaged in black magic, etc., pays malevolent attention to produce long-standing evil to others - such a doer is declared to be Tamasika.  
575 एवं कर्तव्यकर्मविषयज्ञाने कर्तव्ये च कर्मणि अनुष्ठातरि च गुणतः त्रैविध्यम् उक्तम्, इदानीं सर्वतत्त्वसर्वपुरुषार्थनिश्चयरूपाया बुद्धेः धृतेः च गुणतः त्रैविध्यम् आह -बुद्धिः विवेकपूर्वकं निश्चयरूपं ज्ञानम्, धृतिः आरब्धायाः क्रियायाः विघ्नोपनिपाते अपि विधारणसामर्थ्यम्, तयोः सत्त्वादिगुणतः त्रिविधं भेदं पृथक्त्वेन प्रोच्यमानं यथावत् शृणु । 29 । Thus, has been told the threefold division in terms of the Gunas of the knowledge about the work that ought to be performed, and about the agent of work. Now, Sri Krshna describes the threefold division of Buddhi and Dhrti (fortitude) on the basis of Gunas. These faculties give the determinate knowledge of all realities in existence and of all ends of human life (Purusharthas). 'Buddhi' is the knowledge in the form of discriminative determination. 'Dhrti' is the resolution to hold on with perseverance to what has been undertaken, even against all obstacles. Of these two, hear now the threefold division according to Sattva and other Gunas.  
576 प्रवृत्तिः अभ्युदयसाधनभूतो धर्मः, निवृत्तिः मोक्षसाधनभूतो धर्मः, तौ उभौ यथावस्थितौ या बुद्धिः वेत्ति, कार्याकार्ये सर्ववर्णानां प्रवृत्तिनिवृत्तिधर्मयोः, अन्यतरनिष्ठानां देशकालावस्थाविशेषेषु 'इदं कार्यम् इदम् अकार्यम्' इति च या वेत्ति, भयाभये शास्त्रात् निवृत्तिः भयस्थानं तदनुवृत्तिः अभयस्थानं बन्धं मोक्षं च संसारयाथात्म्यं तद्विगमयाथात्म्यं च या वेत्ति, सा सात्त्विकी बुद्धिः । 30 । 'Activity' is that Dharma which is the means for worldly prosperity. 'Renunciation' is that Dharma which is the means for release. The Buddhi which knows both these as they are, is Sattviki-buddhi. Further, such a Buddhi is capable of distinguishing between what ought to be done and what ought not to be done by persons of different stations in life, having as their duty activity or renunciation at particular places or times. Such a Buddhi helps them to know 'This ought to be done and this ought not to be done'. Such a Buddhi discerns transgression of the Sastras as the cause of fear and observance of the Sastras as the cause of fearlessness. It enables one to distinguish between bondage and release, the true nature of Samsara and deliverance from it.The Buddhi that functions in these ways is Sattvika.  
577 यया पूर्वोक्तं द्विविधं धर्मं तद्विपरीतं च तन्निष्ठानां देशकालावस्थादिषु कार्यं च अकार्यं च यथावत् न जानाति सा राजसी बुद्धिः । 31 । That Buddhi by which one does not know exactly the twofold Dharma previously mentioned and its opposite, and what ought to be done and what ought not to be done by those intent on them in accordance with place, time and conditions - that Buddhi is Rajasika.  
578 तामसी तु बुद्धिः तमसा आवृता सती सर्वार्थान् विपरीतान् मन्यते, अधर्मं धर्मं धर्मं च अधर्मम्, सन्तं च अर्थम् असन्तम्, असन्तं च अर्थं सन्तम्, परं च तत्त्वं अपरम्, अपरं च तत्त्वं परम्,एवं सर्वं विपरीतं मन्यते इत्यर्थः । 32 । That Buddhi is of the nature of Tamas which is 'enveloped in Tamas' and 'reverses every value.' The meaning is that it regards 'Adharma as Dharma and Dharma as Adharma, existent as non-existent, and non-existent as existent, and higher truth as the lower and the lower truthas the higher, and thus reverses every value.  
579 यया धृत्या योगेन अव्यभिचारिण्या मनःप्राणेन्द्रियाणां क्रियाः पुरुषो धारयते, योगो मोक्षसाधनभूतं भगवदुपासनम्, योगेन प्रयोजनभूतेन अव्यभिचारिण्या योगोद्देशेन प्रवृत्ताः तत्साधनभूता मनःप्रभृतीनां क्रियाः यया धृत्या धारयते, सा सात्त्विकी इत्यर्थः । 33 । That Dhrti by which one through unswerving Yoga sustains the activities of the mind and the vital force and the sense-organs is said to be of the nature of Sattva. 'Yoga is worship of the Lord which forms the means for release. The meaning is that the Dhrti or fortitude by means of which one sustains the activities of the mind and other organsin the practice of Yoga (worship) until one's object is accomplished, is of the nature of Sattva.  
580 फलाकाङ्क्षी पुरुषः प्रकृष्टसङ्गेन धर्मकामार्थान् यया धृत्या धारयते, सा राजसी, धर्मकामार्थ-शब्देन तत्साधनभूता मनःप्राणेन्द्रियक्रिया लक्ष्यन्ते, 'फलाकाङ्क्षी' इति अत्र अपि फलशब्देन राजसत्वाद् धर्मकामार्था एव विवक्षिताः । अतो धर्मकामार्थापेक्षया मनःप्रभृतीनां क्रियाः यया धृत्या धारयते, सा राजसी इति उक्तं भवति । 34 । That Dhrti by which a person who, desirous of fruits, i.e., through intense attachment holds fast to duty, desires, and wealth, is of the nature of Rajas. By the terms 'Dharma-kamartha,' the activities of the mind, vital force and senses as a means for the attainment of Dharma (duty) Kama (pleasure) and Artha (wealth) are signified. Even in the expression, 'One desirous of fruits,' that term indicates duty, desire and wealth, on account of the Rajasika nature of the aspirant. Therefore, what is said amounts to this: the Dhrti by which one maintains activities of the mind etc., with the purpose of attaining duty, desire and wealth, is of the nature of Rajas.  
581 यया धृत्या स्वप्नं निद्रां मदं विषयानुभवजनितं मदं स्वप्नमदौ उद्दिश्य प्रवृत्ता मनःप्राणादीनां क्रियाः दुर्मेधाः न विमुञ्चति धारयति । भयशोकविषादशब्दाः च भयशोकादिदायिविषयपराः, तत्साधनभूताः च मनःप्राणादिक्रियाः यया धारयते, सा धृतिः तामसी । 35 । That Dhrti by which a foolish person does not give up, i.e., persists in, sleep, and sensuous indulgence through the activities of the mind, vital force etc., that Dhrti is of the nature of Tamas. The terms fear, grief and depression indicate the objects generating fear, grief etc. That Dhrti bywhich one maintains the activities of the mind, the vital force etc., as a means for these, is of the nature of Tamas.  
582 पूर्वोक्ताः सर्वे ज्ञानकर्मकर्त्रादयो यच्छेषभूताः, तत् च सुखं गुणतः त्रिविधम् इदानीं शृणु । यस्मिन् सुखे चिरकालाभ्यासात् क्रमेण निरतिशयां रतिं प्राप्नोति, दुःखान्तं च निगच्छति, निखिलस्य सांसारिकस्य दुःखस्य अन्तं निगच्छति । 36 । Now, hear about the pleasure to which the knowledge, action, agent etc., already mentioned are all subservient and which is threefold according tothe Gunas. ... That pleasure in which a person, through long practice extending over a long time, gradually attains to incomparable joy and never again is engulfed by the pain of life in Samsara.  
583 तद् एव विशिनष्टि -यत् तत् सुखम् अग्रे योगोपक्रमवेलायां बह्वायाससाध्यात्वाद् विविक्तस्वरूपस्य अननुभूतत्वात् च विषम् इव दुःखम् इव भवति, परिणामे अमृतोपमं परिणामे विपाके अभ्यासबलेन विविक्तात्मस्वरूपाविर्भावे अमृतोपमं भवति, तत् च आत्मबुद्दिप्रसादजम्, आत्मविषया बुद्धिः आत्मबुद्धिः, तस्याः निवृत्तसकलेतरविषयत्वं प्रसादः, निवृत्तसकलेतरविषयबुद्ध्या विविक्तस्वभावात्मानुभवजनितं सुखम् अमृतोपमं भवति, तत् सुखं सात्त्विकं प्रोक्तम् । 37 । Sri Krshna explains the same:That pleasure, which 'at the beginning,' i.e., at the time of beginning of Yoga, is 'like poison,' i.e., is painful because it requires strenuous effortsand because the distinct nature of the self is not yet experienced, but which after long practice fructifies in the blissful experience of the self -that joy born of a serene state of mind 'focusing on the self' is Sattvika. The Buddhi concerning the self is 'Atma-buddhi'. When all objects are withdrawn from that Buddhi it becomes serene (Prasanna). The joy born of the experience of the self in its distinct nature, when all objects are withdrawn from the Buddhi, becomes 'like elixir'. That joy is said to be Sattvika.  
584 अग्रे अनुभववेलायां विषयेन्द्रियसंयोगाद् यत् तद् अमृतम् इव भवति, परिणामे विपाके विषयाणां सुखतानिमित्तक्षुधादौ निवृत्ते तस्य च सुखस्य निरयादिनिमित्तत्वाद् विषम् इव पीतं भवति, तत् सुखं राजसं स्मृतम् । 38 । That which at the 'beginning,' i.e., at the time of experience looks like elixir because of the contact of senses with their objects agreable to them, but at the end, i.e., when satiation or further incapacity to enjoydue to over-indulgence in them occurs, looks life poison - that pleasure is said to be Rajasika. In this latter state these so-called enjoyments cause the misery of Naraka.  
585 यत् सुखम् अग्रे च अनुबन्धे च अनुभववेलायां विपाके च आत्मनो मोहनं मोहहेतुः भवति मोहः अत्र यथावस्थितवस्त्वप्रकाशः अभिप्रेतः । निद्रालस्यप्रमादोत्थं निद्रालस्यप्रमादजनितम्, निद्रादयो हि अनुभववेलायाम् अपि मोहहेतवः । निद्राया मोहहेतुत्वं स्पष्टम्, आलस्यम् इन्द्रियव्यापारमान्द्यम्, इन्द्रियव्यापारमान्द्ये च ज्ञानमान्द्यं भवति एव, प्रमादः कृत्यानवधानरूप इति तत्त अपि ज्ञानमान्द्यं भवति, ततः च तयोः अपि मोहहेतुत्वम्, तत् सुखं तामसम् उदाहृतम्, अतो मुमुक्षुणा रजस्तमसी अभिभूय सत्त्वम् एव उपादेयम् इति उक्तं भवति । 39 । Pleasure of the Tamasika type causes delusion to the self at the beginning and the end of enjoyment. Here 'delusion' means the absence of knowledge about things as they are. Pleasure springing from sleep, sloth and error are the cause of it. Even at the time of experience, sleep etc., are the cause of delusion. It is clear how sleep causes delusion.'Sloth' is indolence in sensory operations. When sensory activities are slow, dimness of knowledge results. 'Error' is heedlessness regarding what ought to be done. From this also occurs the dimness of knowledge. Thus, these two also cause delusion. Such pleasure is declared to be Tamasika.Therefore what is meant is this: subduing Rajas and Tamas,the Sattva alone should be allowed to develop by the aspirant for release.  
586 पृथिव्यां मनुष्यादिषु दिवि देवेषु वा प्रकृतिसंसृष्टेषु ब्रह्मादिस्थावरान्तेषु प्रकृतिजैः एभिः त्रिभिः गुणैः मुक्तं यत् सत्त्वं प्राणिजातं न तद् अस्ति । 40 । There is no Sattva or creature born either among men etc., on the earth or among the gods in heaven, from Brahma - down to immobile things, and having their basis in Prakrti, that is free from the dominance of the three Gunas of Prakrti.  
587 'त्यागेनैके अमृतत्वमानशुः' (महाना0 8।14) इत्यादिषु मोक्षसाधनतया निर्दिष्टः त्यागः संन्यासशब्दार्थाद् अनन्यः, स च क्रियमाणेषु एव कर्मसु कर्तृत्वत्यागमूलः, फलकर्मणोः त्यागः कर्तृत्वत्यागः च परमपुरुषे कर्तृत्वानुसन्धानेन इति उक्तम् । एतत् सर्वं सत्त्वगुणवृद्धिकार्यम् इति सत्त्वोपादेयताज्ञापनाय सत्त्वरजस्तमसां कार्यभेदाः प्रपञ्चिताः, इदानीम् एवंभूतस्य मोक्षसाधनतया क्रियमाणस्य कर्मणः परमपुरुषाराधनवेताम्, तथा अनुष्ठितस्य च कर्मणः तत्प्राप्तिलक्षणं फलं प्रतिपादयितुं ब्राह्मणाद्यधिकारिणां स्वभावानुबन्धिसत्त्वादिगुणभेदभिन्नं वृत्या सह कर्तव्यकर्मस्वरूपम् आह -ब्राह्मणक्षत्रियविशां स्वकीयो भावः स्वभावः, ब्राह्मणादिजन्महेतुभूतं प्राचीनं कर्म इत्यर्थः । तत्प्रभवाः सत्त्वादयो गुणाः, ब्राह्मणस्य स्वभावप्रभवो रजस्तमोऽभिभवेन उद्भूतः सत्त्वगुणः, क्षत्रियस्य स्वभावप्रभवः सत्त्वतमसोः अभिभवेन उद्भूतो रजोगुणः, वैश्यस्य स्वभावप्रभवः सत्त्वरजोऽभिभवेन अल्पोद्रिक्तः तमोगुणः, शूद्रस्य स्वभावप्रभवः तु रजः सत्त्वाभिभवेन अत्युद्रिक्तः तमोगुणः । एभिः स्वभावप्रभवैः गुणैः सह प्रविभक्तानि कर्माणि शास्त्रैः प्रतिपादितानि । ब्राह्मणादय एवंगुणकाः तेषां च तानि कर्माणि वृत्तयः च एता इति हि विभज्य प्रतिपादयन्ति शास्त्राणि । 41 । 'Tyaga', which has been determined as forming the means for release in the Sruti texts like 'By Tyaga alone do they attain immortality' (Ma.Na.8.14), is of the same meaning as of the word 'Sannyasa'. It is rooted in the relinquishment of the sense of agency in actions that are being performed.The relinquishment of the results and of possessiveness in actions, and the relinguishing of agency are to be gained by ascribing the agency to the Supreme Person. As all these are the effects of the increase of Sattva-guna, the differences of the effects of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas have been described at length with a view to instruct that Sattva is to be cultivated.Now Sri Krshna, with a view to inculcate that actions done including their fruits, as a means to release and attainment of Him, must be of the nature of the worship of the Supreme Person, and that the fruit thereof is the attainment of Him- describes the actions obligatory for the qualified classes of the people such as Brahmanas, differentiated byvirtue of the natural qualities arising from the Gunas such as Sattva, as also the occupations prescribed for those classes.The nature of Brahmanas, Kshatriyas; Vaisyas, and Sudras are due to their respective inherent dispositions. The meaning is that their past Karma has been the cause of determining births as Brahmanas etc. The Sattva and other Gunas are the result of such Karma. The Sattva-Guna is born from the inherent nature of the Brahmana becoming dominant by suppressing the qualities of Rajas and Tamas. The quality of Rajas originates from the inherent nature of the Kshatriya becoming dominant by suppressing qualities of Sattva and Tamas. TamoGuna arises from the inherent nature of the Vaisya, becoming dominant in a little way bysuppressing Sattva and Rajas. The duties and works assigned to them according to the Gunas constituting their inherent nature, are expounded and allotted by the Sastras in the order described. For the Sastras analyse that the Brahmanas etc., possess such and such attributes and such and such are their duties and occupations.  
588 शमः बाह्येन्द्रियनियमनम् । दमः अन्तःकरणनियमनम् । तपः भोगनियमनरूपः शास्त्रसिद्धः कायक्लेशः । शौचं शास्त्रीयकर्मयोग्यता । क्षान्तिः परैः पीड्यमानस्य अपि अविकृतचित्तता । आर्जवं परेषु मनोऽनुरूपं बाह्यचेष्टाप्रकाशनम् । ज्ञानं परावरतत्त्वयाथात्म्यज्ञानम् । विज्ञानं परतत्त्वगतासाधारणविशेषविषयं ज्ञानम् । आस्तिक्यं वैदिकार्थस्य कृत्स्नस्य सत्यतानिश्चयः प्रकृष्टः, केनापि हेतुना चालयितुमशक्य इत्यर्थः । भगवान् पुरुषोत्तमो वासुदेवः परब्रह्मशब्दाभिधेयो निरस्तनिखिलदोषगन्धः स्वाभाविकानवधिकातिशयज्ञानशक्त्याद्यसंख्येयकल्याणगुणगणो निखिलवेदवेदान्तवेद्यः स एव निखिलजगदेककारणं निखिलजगदाधारभूतो निखिलस्य स एव प्रवर्तयिता तदाराधनभूतं च कृत्स्नं वैदिकं कर्म, तैः तैः आराधितो धर्मार्थकाममोक्षाख्यं फलं प्रयच्छति, इति अस्य अर्थस्य सत्यतानिश्चयः आस्तिक्यम् । 'वेदैश्च सर्वैरहमेव वेद्यः ।' (15।15) 'अहं सर्वस्य प्रभवो मत्तः सर्वं प्रवर्तते ।' (10।8) 'मयि सर्वमिदं प्रोतम् ।'  (7।7) 'भोक्तारं यज्ञतपसां......ज्ञात्वा मां शान्तिमृच्छति ।।' (5।29) 'मत्तः परतरं नान्यत्किंचिदस्ति धनंजय ।' (7।7) 'यतः प्रवृत्तिर्भूतानां येन सर्वमिदं ततम् । स्वकर्मणा तमभ्यर्च्य सिद्धिं विन्दति मानवः ।।' (18।46) 'यो मामजमनादिं च वेत्ति लोकमहेश्वरम् ।' (10।3) इति ह्युच्यते । तद् एतद् ब्राह्मणस्य स्वभावजं कर्म । 42 । 'Sama' is the control of the external sense-organs. 'Dama' is the control of the mind. 'Tapas' is the chastisement of the body by controlling enjoyments, as enjoined by the Sastras. 'Sauca' is fitness for performing acts as enjoined by the Sastras. 'Kshanti' is preserving the composure of the mind, though injured by others. 'Arjava' is straightforwardness expressing itself in correct outward manifestation to others in consonancewith one's own mind. 'Jnana' is knowledge about the real nature of thehigher and lower truths. 'Vijnana' is the knowledge pertaining to exceptional attributes belonging to the Supreme Reality. 'Astikya' or faith is firm conviction in the truth of all things enjoined in the Vedas. The meaning is that it is unshakable by any reason whatever. 'Astikya' is positive conviction in the truth to the following effect: (1) The Lord Vasudeva, the Supreme Person, is signified by the term, Supreme Brahman. (2) He is devoid of even the slightest trace of evil. (3) He possesses countless hosts of auspicious and excellent attributes such as knowledge, strength etc., boundless and natural. (4) To reveal His nature is the sole purpose of the whole of Vedas and the Vedanta and He can be known only through them. (5) He is the sole cause of the universe. (6) He is the foundation of the entire universe. (7) He is the actuator of all. (8) All actions taught in the Vedas form His worship. (9) When worshipped through them, He confers fruits known as Dharma, Artha, Kama and Moksha. That such is the meaning has been declared in the following text: 'IndeedI am to be known from all the Vedas' (15.15); 'I am the origin of all; from Me proceed everything' (10.8), 'All this is strung on Me' (7.7),'Knowing me as the enjoyer of all sacrifices and austerities he attains peace' (10.29), There is nothing greater than myself, Arjuna (7.7) 'He from whom proceeds the activity of all beings and by whom all this is pervaded by worshipping Him with his duty, will a man reach perfection' (18.46); and 'He who knows Me as unborn, without a beginning and the great Lord of the worlds' (10;3).Such are the duties of the Brahmana arising from his inherent nature.  
589 शौर्यं युद्धे निर्भयप्रवेशसामर्थ्यम् । तेजः परैः अनभिभवनीयता । धृतिः आरब्धे कर्मणि विघ्नोपनिपाते अपि तत्समापनसामर्थ्यम् । दाक्ष्यं सर्वक्रियानिर्वृत्तिसामर्थ्यम् । युद्धे च अपि अपलायनं युद्धे च आत्ममरणनिश्चये अपि अनिवर्तनम्, दानम् आत्मीयस्य द्रव्यस्य परस्वत्वापदानपर्यन्तः त्यागः, ईश्वरभावः स्वव्यतिरिक्तसकलजननियमनसामर्थ्यम्, एतत् क्षत्रियस्य स्वभावजं कर्म । 43 । 'Valour' is the ability of plunging into a battle without fear. 'Invincibility' is the capacity to remain undefeated by others. 'Steadiness' is the capacityto complete a work that has been started despite obstacles. 'Adroitness' is the ability in executing all works. 'Apalayana' is not fleeing in a battle though one is convinced of one's death. 'Generosity' is parting with one's own possessions to others even to its entirety. 'Lordliness' is the capacity to govern all others. This is the duty of a Kshatriya born of his inherent nature.  
590 कृषिः सस्योत्पादनकर्षणम् । गोरक्ष्यं पशुपालनम् इत्यर्थः । वाणिज्यं धनसंचयहेतुभूतं क्रयविक्रयात्मकं कर्म । एतद् वैश्यस्य स्वभावजं कर्म । पूर्ववर्णत्रयपरिचर्यारूपं शूद्रस्य स्वभावजं कर्म । तद् एतत् चतुर्णां वर्णानां वृत्तिभिः सह कर्तव्यानां शास्त्रविहितानां यज्ञादिकर्मणां प्रदर्शनार्थम् उक्तम् । यज्ञादयो हि त्रयाणां वर्णानां साधारणाः, शमदमादयः अपि त्रयाणां वर्णानां मुमुक्षूणां साधारणाः । ब्राह्मणस्य तु सत्त्वोद्रेकस्य स्वाभाविकत्वेन शमदमादयः सुखोपादानाः इति कृत्वा तस्य शमदमादयः स्वभावजं कर्म इति उक्तम् । क्षत्रियवैश्ययोः तु स्वतो रजस्तमःप्रधानत्वेन शमदमादयो दुःखोपादानाः इति कृत्वा न तत्कर्म इति उक्तम् । ब्राह्मणस्य तु वृत्तिः याजनाध्यापनप्रतिग्रहाः । क्षत्रियस्य जनपदपरिपालनम् । वैश्यस्य कृष्यादयो यथोक्ताः । शूद्रस्य तु कर्तव्यं वृत्तिः च पूर्ववर्णत्रयपरिचर्या एव । 44 । Agriculture' is cultivation to produce crops. The meaning of 'cattle breeding' is the protection and rearing of cattle. 'Trade' is the activity causing the amassing of wealth through buying and selling. This is the duty of Vaisya born of his inherent nature. The duty of a Sudra, born of his inherent nature, is service to the three Orders mentioned earlier.All these have been described to stress that the occupational activities of the four stations are auxiliary to the performance of sacrifices etc., which are ordained by the Sastra. Sacrifices etc., are common to the first three stations. Control of the senses etc., are common to those who,among the first three stations, are anxious for release. As a Brahmana possesses preponderance of Sattva, and as the control of the senses, mindetc., can be performed by him easily and naturally, control of the senses etc., have been prescribed as his duty. As control of the mind, senses etc.,can be performed only with difficulty by the Kshatriyas and the Vaisyas owing to the preponderance of Rajas and Tamas respectively in them, these have not been stated as their duty. The occupation of a Brahmana is officiating as priest in sacrifices, teaching the Vedas and receiving gifts. The occupation of a Kshatriya is protecting the people and that of the Vaisyas is farming etc., as mentioned before. The duty and occupation of the Sudra is service to the three stations.  
591 स्वे स्वे यथोदिते कर्मणि अभिरतो नरः संसिद्धिं परमपदप्राप्तिं लभते । स्वकर्मनिरतो यथा सिद्धिं विन्दति परमं पदं प्राप्नोति तथा शृणु । 45 । When one is devoted to his own duty in a way mentioned earlier, he attains perfection i.e., the supreme state. When a person is devoted to his duty, how he attains perfection, i.e., attains the supreme state, listen.  
592 यतो भूतानाम् उत्पत्त्यादिका प्रवृत्तिः, येन च सर्वम् इदं ततं स्वकर्मणा तं माम् इन्द्राद्यन्तरात्मतयाअवस्थितम् अभ्यर्च्य मत्प्रसादात् मत्प्राप्तिरूपां सिद्धिं विन्दति मानवः । मत्त एव सर्वम् उत्पद्यते, मया च सर्वम् इदम् ततम् इति पूर्वम् एव उक्तम् - 'अहं कृत्स्नस्य जगतः प्रभवः प्रलयस्तथा ।। मत्तः परतरं नान्यत्किञ्चिदस्ति धनंजय ।' (7।67) 'मया ततमिदं सर्वं जगदव्यक्तमूर्तिना ।' (9।4) 'मयाध्यक्षेण प्रकृतिः सूयते सचराचरम् ।।' (9।10) 'अहं सर्वस्य प्रभवो मत्तः सर्वं प्रवर्तते ।' (10।8) इत्यादिषु । 46 । He from whom arise all activities as origination of all beings and by whom all this is pervaded, by worshipping Him, i.e., Myself, who abidein Indra and other divinities as the Inner Ruler, man attains perfection, consisting in the attainment of Myself by My grace. It has been told before that everything originates from Me and all this is pervaded by Me, in texts like the following: 'I am the origin and dissolution of the whole universe' (7.6), 'There is nothing higher than Myself, O Arjuna' (7.7), 'This entire universe is pervaded by Me in an unmanifest form' (9.4), 'Under My supervision, the Prakrti gives birth to all mobile andimmobile entities' (9.10) and 'I am the origin of all; from Me proceed everything' (10.8).  
593 एवं त्यक्तकर्तृत्वादिको मदाराधनरूपः स्वधर्मः स्वेन एव उपादातुं योग्यो धर्मः । प्रकृतिसंसृष्टेन हि पुरुषेण इन्द्रियव्यापाररूपः कर्मयोगात्मको धर्मः सुकरो भवति । अतः कर्मयोगाख्यः स्वधर्मो विगुणः अपि परधर्माद् इन्द्रियजयनिपुणपुरुषधर्माद् ज्ञानयोगात् सकलेन्द्रियनियमनरूपतया सप्रमादात् कदाचित् स्वनुष्ठितात् श्रेयान् । तद् एव उपपादयति - प्रकृतिसंसृष्टस्य पुरुषस्य इन्द्रियव्यापाररूपतया स्वभावत एव नियतत्वात् कर्मणः कर्म कुर्वन् किल्बिषं संसारं न आप्नोति अप्रमादत्वात् कर्मणः । ज्ञानयोगस्य सकलेन्द्रियनियमनसाध्यतया सप्रमादत्वात् । तन्निष्ठः तु प्रमादात् किल्बिषं प्रतिपद्येत अपि, अतः कर्मनिष्ठा एव ज्यायसी इति तृतीयाध्यायोक्तं स्मारयति । 47 । One's proper Dharma is that which is suitable for performance by oneself, in the form of worshipping Myself, relinquishing agency etc., as has been taught. For, Karma Yoga, consisting in the activities of sense organs, is easy to perform by one in association with Prakrti. Thus, Karma Yoga, even if it is defective in some respects, is better than the Dharma of another, i.e., than Jnana-yoga, even for a person capable of controlling his senses, which is an attainment liable to negligence, because it consists of control over all sense-organs; for, though this may be well performed occasionally, one is always liable to deflection from it.He explains the same:As Karma consists of the activities of the sense-organs, it is ordained by Nature for one who is conjoined with Prakrti, i.e., the body. So by performing Karma Yoga one does not incur any stain. But Jnana Yoga is liable to negligence, because it requires the control of the senses from the very beginning for its performance. One intent on it is likely to incur stain from negligence. [Thus we are reminded about what was mentioned in the third chapter - that Karma Yoga alone is greater].  
594 अतः सहजत्वेन सुकरम् अप्रमादं च कर्म सदोषं सदुःखम् अपि न त्यजेत् । ज्ञानयोगयोग्यः अपि कर्मयोगम् एव कुर्वीत इत्यर्थः । सर्वारम्भाः कर्मारम्भा ज्ञानारम्भाः च हि दोषेण दुःखेन धूमेन अग्निः इव आवृताः । इयान् तु विशेषः कर्मयोगः सुकरः अप्रमादः च, ज्ञानयोगः तद्विपरीतः इति । 48 । So, one should not relinquish one's works, understanding that they are natural, are easy to perform and not liable to negligence. Such thoughts coupled with the idea that there are imperfections in them should not lead you to abandon them. The meaning is that though one is fit forJnana Yoga, one should perform Karma Yoga only. All enterprises, be they of Karma or Jnana, are indeed enveloped by imperfections, by pain,as fire by smoke. But still there is this difference: Karma Yoga is easy and does not involve negligence, but Jnana Yoga is contrary to this.  
595 सर्वत्र फलादिषु असक्तबुद्धिः जितात्मा जितमनाः परमपुरुषकर्तृत्वानुसन्धानेन आत्मकर्तृत्वे विगतस्पृहः एवं त्यागाद् अनन्यत्वेन निर्णीतेन संन्यासेन युक्तः कर्म कुर्वन् परमां नैष्कर्म्यसिद्धिम् अधिगच्छति । परमां ध्याननिष्ठां ज्ञानयोगस्य अपि फलभूताम् अधिगच्छति इत्यर्थः । वक्ष्यमाणध्यानयोगावाप्तिं सर्वेन्द्रियकर्मोपरतिरूपाम् अधिगच्छति । 49 । He whose understanding is, on all sides, without attachments, concerning fruits etc., whose 'self is conquered,' i.e., 'who has conquered his mind; who, by contemplating on the agency of the Supreme Person, is free from the habit of attributing agency to the self; and who is thus equipped with Sannyasa which has been positively determined to be the same as Tyaga - such a man, performing actions, attains supreme perfection which is free from all activities. The meaning is that he attains devotion to Dhyana which is the consummation of even Jnana Yoga; he attains DhyanaYoga (Yoga of meditation) consisting in the complete cessation of sensory activity, which is going to be describedhereafter.  
596 सिद्धिं प्राप्तः आप्रयाणाद् अहरहः अनुष्ठीयमानकर्मयोगनिष्पाद्यध्यानसिद्धिं प्राप्तो यथा येन प्रकारेण वर्तमानो ब्रह्म प्राप्नोति तथा समासेन मे निबोध । तद् एव ब्रह्म विशिष्यते निष्ठा ज्ञानस्य या परा इति । ज्ञानस्य ध्यानात्मकस्य या परा निष्ठा परं प्राप्यम् इत्यर्थः । 50 । One who has attained 'perfection', viz., one who has attained perfection in meditation generated by the KarmaYoga performed day after day till death - how, in whatway, he attains the brahman, learn this from Me in brief. It is the same Brahman who is described as the supreme consummation of knowledge. The meaning is that the self is the supremeconsummation, the supreme end, of knowledge which is of the nature of meditation.  
597 बुद्ध्या विशुद्धया यथावस्थितात्मतत्त्वविषयया युक्तः, धृत्या आत्मानं नियम्य च विषयविमुखीकरणेन योगयोग्यं मनः कृत्वा, शब्दादीन् विषयान् त्यक्त्वा असन्निहितान् कृत्वा, तन्निमित्तौ च राषद्वेषौ व्युदस्य, विविक्तसेवी सर्वैः ध्यानविरोधिभिः विविक्ते देशे वर्तमानः, लघ्वाशी अत्यशनानशनरहितः, यतवाक्कायमानसः ध्यानाभिमुखीकृतकायवाङ्मनोवृत्तिः, ध्यानयोगपरो नित्यम् एवंभूतः सन् आप्रयाणाद् अहरहः ध्यानयोगपरः, वैराग्यं समुपाश्रितः ध्येयतत्त्वव्यतिरिक्तविषयदोषावमर्शेन तत्र विरागतां वर्धयन् अहंकारम्, अनात्मनि आत्माभिमानं बलं तद्विवृद्धिहेतुभूतं वासनाबलं तन्निमित्तं दर्पं कामं परिग्रहं विमुच्य, निर्ममः ,सर्वेषु अनात्मीयेषु आत्मीयबुद्धिरहितः शान्तः आत्मानुभवैकसुखः, एवंभूतो ध्यानयोगं कुर्वन् ब्रह्मभूयाय कल्पते ब्रह्मभावाय कल्पते सर्वबन्धविनिर्मुक्तो यथावस्थितम् आत्मानम् अनुभवति इत्यर्थः । 51-53 । 'Endowed with a purified understanding' means endowed with the Buddhi capable of understanding the self as it is in reality; 'subduing the mind by steadiness' means making the mind fit for meditation by turningaway from external and internal objects; 'relinquishing sound and other objects of senses' means keeping them far away, casting aside love and hate occasioned by them (i.e., the sense objects). 'Resorting to solitude' means living in a lonely place free from hindrances to meditation; 'eat but little' means eating neither too much nor too little; 'restraining speech, body and mind' means directing the operations of body, speech and mind to meditation; 'ever engaged in the Yoga of meditation' means being like this, i,e., constantly engaged in theYoga of meditation day after day until death; 'taking refuge in dispassion' means developing aversion to all objects except the one entity to be meditated upon, by considering the imperfections of all objects and thus cultivating detachment to everything.Forsaking 'egoism' means abandoning the tendency to consider what is other than the self as the self, as well as neutralising the power of forcible Vasanas (tendencies) which nourish (egoism), and the resulting pride, desire, wrath and possessiveness. 'With no feeling of mine' meansfree from the notion that what does not belong to oneself belongs to oneself; 'Who is tranquil' means, who finds sole happiness in experiencing the self. One who has become like this and performs the Yoga of meditation becomes worthy for the state of Brahman. The meaning is that, freed from all bonds, he experiences' the self as It really is.  
598 ब्रह्मभूतः आविर्भूतापरिच्छिन्नज्ञानैकाकारमच्छेषतैकस्वभावात्मस्वरूपः । 'इतस्त्वन्यां प्रकृतिं विद्धि मे पराम् ।' (7।5) इति हि स्वशेषता उक्ता । प्रसन्नात्मा क्लेशकर्मादिभिः अकलुषस्वरूपो मद्व्यतिरिक्तं न कंचन भूतविशेषं प्रति शोचति न कंचन काङ्क्षति, अपि तु मद्व्यतिरिक्तेषु सर्वेषु भूतेषु अनादरणीयतायां समो निखिलं वस्तुजातं तृणवत् मन्यमानो मद्भक्तिं लभते पराम् । मयि सर्वेश्वरे निखिलजगदुद्भवस्थितिप्रलयलीले निरस्तसमस्तहेयगन्धे अनवधिकातिशयासंख्येयकल्याणगुणगणैकताने लावण्यामृतसागरे श्रीमति पुण्डरीकनयने स्वस्वामिनि अत्यर्थप्रियानुभवरूपां परां भक्तिं लभते । 54 । 'Having realised the state of Brahman,' means having got from revelationan understanding of the nature of the self as consisting of unlimited knowledge and of being a Sesha (subservient being) to Me. Subservience to Me has been posited in, 'Know that which is other than this (Prakrti or lower Nature) to be the higher Prakrti of Mine' (7.5). One who is 'tranquil' means one who is not contaminated by various forms of grief (the five Klesas of Yoga-sutras), and does not grieve about any being other than Myself, nor desires anything other than Myself. On the other hand, he becomes equally indifferent to all beings other than Myself as worthless as straw and attains supreme Bhakti for Me. He attains 'supreme devotion' to Me, which is of the form of an experience which makes Me dear beyond all description - Me the Lord of all, to whom creation, protection and dissolution of the universe is a sport, who is devoid of the slightest trace of evil, who is the sole seat of countless hosts of auspicious attributes which are excellent and unlimited; and whois the ocean of the elixir of beauty; who is the Lord of Sri; who is Lotus-eyed; and who is the self's own Lord.  
599 तत्फलम् आह -स्वरूपतः स्वभावतः च यः अहं गुणतो विभूतितो यावान् च अहं तं माम् एवंरूपया भक्त्या तत्त्वतो विजानाति । मां तत्त्वतो ज्ञात्वा तदनन्तरं तत्त्वज्ञानानन्तरं ततो भक्तितो मां विशते प्रविशति । तत्त्वतः स्वरूपस्वभावगुणविभूतिदर्शनोत्तरकालभाविन्या अनवधिकातिशयभक्त्या मां प्राप्नोति इत्यर्थः । अत्र तत इति प्राप्तिहेतुतया निर्दिष्टा भक्तिः एव अभिधीयते । 'भक्त्या त्वनन्यया शक्यः' (11।54) इति तस्या एव तत्त्वतः प्रवेशहेतुताभिधानात् । 55 । Sri Krshna declares the fruits of this (devotion) :Through such devotion, he knows 'who I am,' i.e., knows My own essence and My nature, and 'what I am,' i.e., in My attributes and glory. Knowing Me truly, he rises to a higher level than this Bhakti, and acquiring knowledge of the truth, enters into Me through devotion. The meaning is that he attains Me by means of infinite and unsurpassedBhakti which develops subsequent in time to the vision of the nature, attributes and glory of the Lord in reality. Here the term 'Tatah' (through)denotes that devotion is the cause of attainment, for it has been stated to be the cause of entrance in the text; 'But by single-minded devotion it is possible...' (11.54).  
600 एवं वर्णाश्रमोचितनित्यनैमित्तिककर्मणां परित्यक्तफलादिकानां परमपुरुषाराधनरूपेण अनुष्ठितानां विपाक उक्तः । इदानीं काम्यानाम् अपि कर्मणाम् उक्तेन एव प्रकारेण अनुष्ठीयमानानां स एव विपाक इत्याह -न केवलं नित्यनैमित्तिककर्माणि अपि तु काम्यानि अपि सर्वाणि कर्माणि मद्व्यपाश्रयः मयि संन्यस्तकर्तृत्वादिकः कुर्वाणो मत्प्रसादात् शाश्वतं पदम् अव्ययम् अविकलं प्राप्नोति । पद्यते गम्यते इति पदम् मां प्राप्नोति इत्यर्थः ।  In this way, the crowning development has been told starting from the disinterested performance of periodical and occasional rites suitable for the various stations and stages of life, which are to be performed to propitiate the Supreme Person. Sri Krshna now explains that even foractions meant for attaining desired objects (Kamya-karmas) the crowning stage is the same as for these described above, provided they too are done not for fulfilling one's desires but as offerings to propitiate the Supreme Person.'Taking refuge in Me' means leaving agency etc., to Me. He who performs 'all works constantly' means works that are not only obligatory and occasional acts but even those meant to fulfil desires (Kamya Karmas) - he attains, by My grace, the eternal realm which is immutable. 'Pada' means that which is attained. The meaning is that he attains Me. [The idea is that the performance of even those ritualistic actions enjoined for those having the fulfilment of certain desires in view,even these actions, if done without any such desire but only as the worship of the Supreme Person - they have the same effect as the performance of the enjoined daily and occasional rituals to which no effect except the purification of the self is offered by the Sastras].  
601 यस्माद् एवं तस्मात् -चेतसा आत्मनो मदीयत्वमन्नियाम्यत्वबुद्ध्या, उक्तं हि 'मयि सर्वाणि कर्माणि संन्यस्याध्यात्मचेतसा ।' (3।30) इति सर्वकर्माणि सकर्तृकाणि साराध्यानि मयि संन्यस्य मत्परः 'अहम् एव फलतया प्राप्यः' इति अनुसंदधानः कर्माणि कुर्वन् इमम् एव बुद्धियोगम् उपाश्रित्य सततं मच्चित्तो भव । 57 । Since it is so, therefore:'By your mind' means with thought which considers the self as belongingto Me and as controlled by Me. For, it has been declared: 'Surrendering all your acts to, Me with a mind focussed on the self' (3.30). Surrendering all acts to Me along with agentship and the object of worship and regarding 'Me as the goal,' i.e., constantly contemplatingthat I alone am to be attained as the goal; performing all acts; and resorting to Buddhi-Yoga; focus your mind on Me always. Buddhi Yogahere implies the mental attitude special to the seeker of salvation in regard to agency of works, the fruits etc.  
602 एवम् -मच्चित्तः सर्वकर्माणि कुर्वन् सर्वाणि सांसारिकाणि दुर्गाणि मत्प्रसादाद् एव तरिष्यसि । अथ त्वम् अहंकाराद् अहम् एव कृत्याकृत्यविषयं सर्वं जानामि इति भावात् मदुक्तं न श्रोष्यसि चेद् विनङ्क्ष्यसि नष्टो भविष्यसि । न हि कश्चिद् मद्व्यतिरिक्तः कृत्स्नस्य प्राणिजातस्य कृत्याकृत्ययोः ज्ञाता शासिता वा अस्ति । 58 । Thus, focusing your thought on Me, if you can perform all acts, you will, by My grace, cross over all difficulties of Samsara'. If, however, out of 'self-conceit,' i.e., out of the feeling, 'I know well what is to be done and what is not to be done' - out of such a feeling, if you do not heed My words, you shall perish. Except Myself, there is none whoknows what ought and what ought not to be done by all living beings; there is also none other than Myself who is in the position of a law-giver to them.  
603 यद् अहंकारम् आत्मनि हिताहितज्ञाने स्वातन्त्र्याभिमानम् आश्रित्य मन्नियोगम् अनादृत्य न योत्स्ये इति मन्यसे एष ते स्वातन्त्र्यव्यवसायो मिथ्या भविष्यति । यतः प्रकृतिः त्वां युद्धे नियोक्ष्यति, मत्स्वातन्त्र्योद्विग्नमनसं त्वाम् अज्ञं प्रकृतिः नियोक्ष्यति । 59 । If, in your 'self-conceit,' i.e., under a false sense of independence that you know what is good for you and what is not - if, not heeding My command, you think, 'I will not fight,' then this resolve based on your sense of independence will be in vain. For Nature will compel you to go against your resolve - you who are ignorant and who adversely react to my sovereignty.  
604 तद् उपपादयति -स्वभावजं हि क्षत्रियस्य कर्म शौर्यं स्वभावजेन शौर्याख्येन स्वेन कर्मणा निबद्धः तत एव अवशः परैः धर्षणम् असहमानः त्वम् एव तद् युद्धं करिष्यसि, यद् इदानीं मोहाद् अज्ञानात् कर्तुं न इच्छसि । 60 । He elucidates the same:For, heroism is the duty of a Kshatriya born of his nature. Impelled by your own duty of heroism born of your own nature, you will lose self-control when you get the taunts of your enemies. Unable to suffer it, you will be compelled to engage them in battle, which, now, out of delusion and ignorance, you do not desire to do.  
605 सर्वं हि भूतजातं सर्वेश्वरेण मया पूर्वकर्मानुगुण्येन प्रकृत्यनुवर्तने नियमितम्, तत् शृणु -ईश्वरः सर्वनियमनशीलो वासुदेवः सर्वभूतानां हृद्देशे सकलप्रवृत्तिमूलज्ञानोदये देशे तिष्ठति । कथं किं कुर्वन् तिष्ठति? यन्त्रारूढानि सर्वभूतानि मायया भ्रामयन् स्वेन एव निर्मितं देहेन्द्रियावस्थप्रकृत्याख्यं यन्त्रम् आरूढानि सर्वभूतानि स्वकीयया सत्त्वादिगुणमय्या मायया गुणानुगुणं प्रवर्तयन् तिष्ठति इत्यर्थः । पूर्वम् अपि एतद् उक्तम् 'सर्वस्य चाहं हृदि सन्निविष्टो मत्तः स्मृतिर्ज्ञानमपोहनं च' (15।15) इति 'मत्तः सर्वं प्रवर्तते' (10।8) इति च । श्रुतिश्च - 'य आत्मनि तिष्ठन्' (शत0 ब्रा0 1।13।1) इत्यादिका । 61 । All beings have been ordained by Me to follow their Prakrti acquired by their previous Karmas. Listen about it:Lord Vasudeva, who is the ruler over all, lives in 'the heart of all beings,'i.e., in the region from which arises all knowledge which is at the root of all secular and spiritual activities. How and doing what does He exist?He exists enabling, by His Maya (power), 'all beings who are mounted, as it were, on the machine Prakrti' in the form of body and senses createdby Himself, to act in accordance with their Gunas of Sattva and others. It was already expressed in 'And I am seated in the hearts of all. From Me are memory, knowledge and their removal also' (15.15) and in :'From Me proceed everything' (10.8). The Srutis also proclaim 'He who, dwelling in the self' (Br.U.Madh.3.7.22).  
606 एतन्मायानिवृत्तिहेतुम् आह -यस्माद् एवं तस्मात् तम् एव सर्वस्य प्रशासितारम् आश्रितवात्सल्येन त्वत्सारथ्ये अवस्थितम् 'इत्थं कुरु' इति च प्रशासितारं मां सर्वात्मना शरणं गच्छ अनुवर्तस्व । अन्यथा तन्मायाप्रेरितेन अज्ञेन त्वया युद्धादिकरणम् अवर्जनीयम्, तथा सति नष्टो भविष्यसि । अतो मदुक्तप्रकारेण युद्धादिकं कुरु इत्यर्थः । एवं कुर्वाणः तत्प्रसादात् परां शान्तिं सर्वकर्मबन्धोपशमनं शाश्वतं च स्थानं प्राप्स्यसि । यद् अभिधीयते श्रुतिशतैः - 'तद्विष्णोः परमं पदं सदा पश्यन्ति सूरयः ।' (ऋ0 सं0 1।2।6।5) 'ते ह नाकं महिमानः सचन्त यत्र पूर्वे साध्याः सन्ति देवाः ।' (यजुःस0 31।16) 'यत्र ऋषयः प्रथमजा ये पुराणाः ।' 'परेण नाकं निहितं गुहायाम्' (महाना0 8।14) 'यो अस्याध्यक्षः परमे व्योमन् ।' (ऋ0 सं0 8।7।17।7) 'सोऽध्वनः पारमाप्नोति तद्विष्णोः परमं पदम्' (क0 उ0 3।9) इत्यादिभिः । 62 । He now explains the way to get rid of the Maya:Such being the case, take refuge with all your heart (Sarvabhavena), by every disposition of your body, senses, and mind (Sarvatmana) in Him - Him, the ruler of all, who has become your charioteer out of compassionfor dependents, - and who orders you, 'Act thus' and so on. Even if you donot do so now, fighting in battle etc., is inevitable for you who are ignorant and actuated by His Maya, but then you will get ruined. Therefore, fight etc., in the manner which has been explained by Him. Such is the meaning.Acting in this way, you will attain supreme peace, release from all bondage, and the eternal abode. Hundreds of Srutis declare it: 'That supreme place of Vishnu which the sages see' (Rg.S.1.2.6.5); 'They become meritorious and reach this heaven where Devas and Sadhyas dwell' (Tai.A.3.12); 'where dwell the ancient sages, the first born' (Tai.Sam.4.7.13.1); 'The supreme place above the paradise in the heart of the Supreme Heaven' (Ma.Na.8.14); 'He who is in the Supreme Heaven and presides over this' (Rg.S.8.7.17.7); 'Now that light Which shines above this Supreme Heaven' (Cha,U.3.13.7); and 'He reaches the end of the journey, the Highest abode of Vishnu' (Ka.U.3.9).  
607 इति एवं ते मुमुक्षुभिः अधिगन्तव्यं ज्ञानं सर्वस्माद् गुह्याद् गुह्यतरं कर्मयोगविषयं ज्ञानयोगविषयं भक्तियोगविषयं च सर्वम् आख्यातम् । एतद् अशेषेण विमृश्य स्वाधिकारानुरूपं यथा इच्छसि तथा कुरु, कर्मयोगं ज्ञानं भक्तियोगं वा यथेष्टम् आतिष्ठ इत्यर्थः । 63 । Thus, in this manner, has been set forth everything that is to be acquired by those aspirants for release - the mystery of mysteries, concerning Karma Yoga, Jnana Yoga andBhakti Yoga. Reflecting on it fully, do what you wish to do according to your qualification - i.e., follow Karma Yoga, or Jnana Yoga or Bhakti Yoga according to your liking. Such is the meaning.  
608 सर्वेषु एतेषु गुह्येषु भक्तियोगस्य श्रेष्ठत्वाद् गुह्यतमम् इति पूर्वम् एव उक्तम् 'इदं तु ते गुह्यतमं प्रवक्ष्याम्यनसूयवे ।' (9।1) इत्यादौ । भूयः अपि तद्विषयं परमं मे वचः शृणु इष्टः असि मे दृढम् इति ततः ते हितं वक्ष्यामि । 64 । It has been said that Bhakti Yoga is the most secret of all secrets, in such texts as 'I will declare to you, who does not cavil, this most mysterious knowledge' (9.1). Hear again My supreme word concerning it (i.e., Bhakti Yoga). As you are exceedingly dear to Me, therefore, I shall declare what is good for you.  
609 वेदान्तेषु - 'वेदाहमेतं पुरुषं महान्तमादित्यवर्णं तमसः परस्तात् ।' (श्वे0 उ0 3।8) 'तमेवं विद्वानमृत इह भवति । नान्यः पन्था विद्यतेऽयनाय' (श्वे0 उ0 3।8) इत्यादिषु विहितं वेदनध्यानोपासनादिशब्दवाच्यं दर्शनसमानाकारं स्मृतिसन्तानम् अत्यर्थप्रियम् इह 'मन्मना भव' इति विधीयते । मद्भक्तः अत्यर्थं मत्प्रियः अत्यर्थमत्प्रियत्वेन च निरतिशयप्रियां स्मृतिसंततिं कुरुष्व इत्यर्थः । मद्याजी तत्रापि मद्भक्त इति अनुषज्यते । यजनं पूजनम्, अत्यर्थप्रियमदाराधनपरो भव । आराधनं हि परिपूर्णशेषवृत्तिः । मां नमस्कुरु नमो नमनं मयि अतिमात्रप्रह्वीभावम् अत्यर्थप्रियं कुरु इत्यर्थः । एवं वर्तमानो माम् एव एष्यसि इति एतत् सत्यं ते प्रतिजाने तव प्रतिज्ञां करोमि, न उपच्छन्दनमात्रं यतः त्वं प्रियः असि मे 'प्रियो हि ज्ञानिनोऽत्यर्थमहं स च मम प्रियः' (7।17) इति पूर्वम् एव उक्तम् । यस्य मयि अतिमात्रप्रीतिः वर्तते मम अपि तस्मिन् अतिमात्रप्रीतिः भवति इति तद्वियोगम् असहमानः अहं तं मां प्रापयामि, अतः सत्यम् एव प्रतिज्ञातं माम् एव एष्यसि इति । 65 । What is enjoined in Vedanta texts such as 'I know the Great Person of the radiance of the sun, who is beyond this Prakrti. Knowing Him thus, one becomes here immortal; there is no other path for immortality' (Sve.U.3.8); what is designated by words such as knowledge (Vedana), meditation (Dhyana) and worship (Upasana); what is of the form of direct perception (Darsana) having the character of continuous successionof memory of a surpassingly loving nature to the worshipped - it is this that is enjoined herein by the words 'Focus your mind on Me,' 'Be My devotee. 'It means, be one to whom I am incomparably dear. Since I amthe object of superabundant love, meditate on Me, i.e., practise the succession of memory of unsurpassed love of Me. Such is the meaning. Be My worshipper (yaji). Here also the expression, 'Be My devotee' is applicable. Yajna is worship. Worship Me as one exceedingly dear to you. Worship (Aradhana) is complete subservience to the Lord. Prostratebefore Me. Prostration means bowing down. The meaning is: Bow down humbly before Me with great love.Renouncing thus all ego-centredness, you shall come to Me. I make this solemn promise to you. Do not take it as a mere flattery. For you are dear to Me. It has been already stated, 'For I am inexpressibly dear to theman of knowledge and dear is he to Me' (7.17). He in 'whom there is surpassing love for Me, I hold him also as surpassingly dear to Me. Consequently, not being able to bear separation from him, I myself will enable him to attain Me. It is this truth alone that has been solemnly declared to you in the expression that 'you shall come to Me alone.'  
610 कर्मयोगज्ञानयोगभक्तियोगरूपान् सर्वान् धर्मान् परमनिःश्रेयससाधनभूतान् मदाराधनत्वेन अतिमात्रप्रीत्या यथाधिकारं कुर्वाण एव उक्तरीत्या फलकर्मकर्तृत्वादिपरित्यागेन परित्यज्य माम् एकम् एव कर्तारम् आराध्यं प्राप्यम् उपायं च अनुसंधत्स्व । एष एव सर्वधर्माणां शास्त्रीयपरित्यागः इति 'निश्चयं शृणु मे तत्र त्यागे भरतसत्तम । त्यागो हि पुरुषव्याघ्र त्रिविधः संप्रकीर्तितः। ' (18।4) इत्यारभ्य 'सङ्गं त्यक्त्वा फलं चैव स त्यागः सात्त्विको मतः ।' (18।9) न हि देहभृता शक्यं त्यक्तुं कर्माण्यशेषतः । यस्तु कर्मफलत्यागी स त्यागीत्यभिधीयते ।।' (18।11) इति अध्यायादौ सुदृढम् उपपादितम् । अहं त्वा सर्वपापेभ्यो मोक्षयिष्यामि एवं वर्तमानं त्वां मत्प्राप्तिविरोधिभ्यः अनादिकाल-संचितानन्ताकृत्यकरणकृत्याकरणरूपेभ्यः सर्वेभ्यः पापेभ्यो मोक्षयिष्यामि मा शुचः शोकं मा कृथाः । अथवा सर्वपापविनिर्मुक्तात्यर्थभगवत्प्रियपुरुषनिर्वर्त्यत्वाद् भक्तियोगस्य तदारम्भविरोधिपापानाम्आनन्त्यात् च तत्प्रायश्चित्तरूपैः धर्मैः अपरिमितकालकृतैः तेषां दुस्तरतया आत्मनो भक्तियोगारम्भानर्हताम् आलोच्य शोचतः अर्जुनस्य शोकम् अपनुदन् श्रीभगवान् उवाच - सर्वधर्मान् परित्यज्य माम् एकं शरणं व्रज इति । भक्तियोगारम्भविरोध्यनादिकालसंचितनानाविधानन्तपापानुगुणान् तत्प्रायाश्चित्तरूपान् कृच्छ्रचान्द्रायणकूष्माण्डवैश्वानरप्राजापत्यव्रातपतिपवित्रेष्टित्रिवृदग्निष्टोमादिकान् नानाविधानन्तान् त्वया परिमितकालवर्तिना दुरनुष्ठान् सर्वधर्मान् परित्यज्य भक्तियोगारम्भसिद्धयेमाम् एकं परमकारुणिकम् अनालोचितविशेषाशेषलोकशरण्यम् आश्रितवात्सल्यजलधिं शरणं प्रपद्यस्व । अहं त्वा सर्वपापेभ्यो यथोदितस्वरूपभक्त्यारम्भविरोधिभ्यः सर्वेभ्यः पापेभ्यो मोक्षयिष्यामि, मा शुचः । 66 । 'Relinquishing all Dharmas' means the complete relinquishment of the sense of agency, possessiveness, fruits etc., in the practising of Karma, Jnana and Bhakti Yogas in the way instructed, and the realising of Me as the agent, object of worship, the means and the end. It means thatrelinquishment is not of all devotional duties but only of the sense of agency and the fruits. This is the Sastraic relinquishment of all Dharmas.It is firmly established in the beginning of this chapter commencing from, 'Listen regarding My decision, O Arjuna, about abandonment; for abandonment is declared to be of three kinds' (18.4), and 'Renouncingattachments and also the fruit, such abandonment is regarded as Sattvika... for it is impossible for one who bears the body to abandon acts entirely. But he who gives up the fruits of works, is called the abandoner' (18.9-11).If you practise such abandonment of the sense of agency and fruits; I will release you from all 'sins' i.e., I will release you from all evil incompatible with the attainment of Myself, consisting of innumerable acts of the nature of doing what ought not to be done and not doing what ought to be done. These piled up from beginningless times form the obstruction in the way. Grieve not, you should not despair; for I shall release you from all these obstructions.Another (alternative) explanation is this: Bhakti Yoga is possible only for those people to whom the Lord is exceedingly dear and who are free from all evils. Those evils are so huge in their case that the expiatory rites which could wash them off, could not be performed in the limited time of one's life span. Arjuna therefore thought that he was unfit for commencing Bhakti Yoga. To remove the grief of Arjuna the Lord said: 'Completely relinquishing all Dharmas, seek Me alone for refuge.' Expiatory rites can be taken here as what is meant by Dharma, Completely forsake these rites (Dharmas) appropriate for the removal of numerous and varied sins piled up from beginningless time and obstructing the starting of Bhakti Yoga. The expiatory rites consist of practices like Krcchra, Candrayana, Kushmanda, Vaisvanara, Vratapati, Pavitreshti, Trvrit, Agnishtoma etc., which are of manifold varieties, and which are difficult to perform on account of the brevity of life. Soin order to succeed in commencing Bhakti Yoga, seek Me alone for refuge. I am supremely compassionate, the refuge of all without considering the differences of character among them, and am an ocean of tenderness for those dependent on Me. I will release you from all evil,the nature of which has been explained as incompatible with the commencement of Bhakti Yoga. Grieve not. [Both these interpretations of this famous verse are said to teach only Bhakti Yoga and not Prapatti. But the question will rise in one's mind - why should it not be so taken?]  
611 इदं ते परमं गुह्यं शास्त्रं मया आख्यातम् अतपस्काय अतप्ततपसे त्वया न वाच्यं त्वयि वक्तरि मयि च अभक्ताय कदाचन न वाच्यं तप्ततपसे च अभक्ताय न वाच्यम् इत्यर्थः । न च अशुश्रूषवे भक्ताय अपि अशुश्रूषवे न वाच्यं न च मां यः अभ्यसूयति मत्स्वरूपे मदैश्वर्ये मदगुणेषु च कथितेषु यो दोषम् आविष्करोति न तस्मै वाच्यम्, असमानविभक्तिनिर्देशः तस्य अत्यन्तपरिहरणीयताज्ञापनाय । 67 । I have taught you this most secret doctrine. This should not be imparted by you to someone who has not practised austere disciplines. Never should this be taught to someone who is not devoted to Me and to you, the teacher (i.e.,when you have to play the role of a teacher of this doctrine). The meaning is that it should not be taught by you to someone who, though practising austerities, is not a devotee and does not serve Me. It is also never to be taught to one who has no wish to listen, even though he is a devotee. Nor should it be imparted to one who traducesMe, that is who - when My nature, glories and attributes are described - discovers defects in them. The differences of case (from ablative to nominative form) is to teach that the last one is the most despicable character.  
612 इदं परमं गुह्यं मद्भक्तेषु यः अभिधास्यति, व्याख्यास्यति सः मयि परमां भक्तिं कृत्वा माम् एव एष्यति न तत्र संशयः । 68 । Who so expounds or elucidates this supreme mystery to My devotees, he, acquiring supreme devotion towards Me, will reach Me only. There is no doubt about this.  
613 सर्वेषु मनुष्येषु इतः पूर्वं तस्माद् अन्यो मनुष्यो मे न कश्चित् प्रियकृत्तमः अभूत्, इतः उत्तरं च न भविता, अयोग्यानां प्रथमम् उपादानं योग्यानाम् अकथनाद् अपि तत्कथनस्य अनिष्टतमत्वात् । 69 । There never exists nor has existed anyone other than such a person as described, who does greater service to Me than he. In the future too, there will not be another such. The first reference is to those who are not worthy to hear the Gita. It is meant to teach that explaining it to them is more displeasing to the Lord than not teaching to those who are worthy.  
614 य इमम् आवयोः धर्म्यं संवादम् अध्येष्यते, तेन ज्ञानयज्ञेन अहम् इष्टः स्याम्, इति मे मतिः । अस्मिन् यो ज्ञानयज्ञः अभिधीयते, तेन अहम् एतद् अध्ययनमात्रेण इष्टः स्याम् इत्यर्थः । 70 । He who will study the dialogue between us, which is consistent with the path to realisation, by him I shall be worshipped through the sacrifice of knowledge. Such is My view. The meaning is that whatever sacrifice of knowledge is taught herein, by that I shall become worshipped by themere fact of its study.  
615 श्रद्धावान् अनसूयश्च यो नरः शृणुयाद् अपि तेन श्रवणमात्रेण सः अपि भक्तिविरोधिपापेभ्यो मुक्तः पुण्यकर्मणां मद्भक्तानां लोकान् समूहान् प्राप्नुयात् । 71 । A man who, with faith and without cavilling, hears the Gita when taught by a qualified teacher, he too is, by such hearing, released from all evil incompatible with devotional life. He shall reach the Lokas, i.e., the realms of the hosts of My devotees who have done virtuous acts, andwho will facilitate the growth of devotion in these new arrivals and lead them ultimately to liberation.  
616 मया कथितम् एतत् पार्थ त्वया अवहितेन चेतसा कच्चित् श्रुतम्? तव अज्ञानसंमोहः कच्चित् प्रनष्टः? येन अज्ञानेन मूढो न योत्स्यामि, इति उक्तवान् । 72 । O Arjuna, have you heard attentively all that I have taught? Has your delusion caused by ignorance, been dispelled - that ignorance deluded by which you said, 'I shall not fight'?  
617 अर्जुन उवाचमोहः विपरीतज्ञानं त्वत्प्रसादात् मम तद् विनष्टम् । स्मृतिः यथावस्थिततत्त्वज्ञानं त्वत्प्रसादाद् एव तत् च लब्धम् । अनात्मनि प्रकृतौ आत्माभिमानरूपो मोहः, परमपुरुषशरीरतया तदात्मकस्य कृत्स्नस्य चिदचिद्वस्तुनः अतदात्माभिमानरूपः च, नित्यनैमित्तिकरूपस्य कर्मणः परमपुरुषाराधनतया तत्प्राप्त्युपायभूतस्य बन्धत्वबुद्धिरूपः च, सर्वो विनष्टः । आत्मनः प्रकृतिविलक्षणत्वतत्स्वभाव-रहितताज्ञातृत्वैकस्वभावतापरमपुरुषशेषतातन्नियाम्यत्वैकस्वरूपताज्ञानम्, भगवतो निखिलजगदुत्पत्तिस्थितिप्रलयलीलाशेषदोषप्रत्यनीककल्याणैकस्वरूपस्वाभाविकानवधिकातिशय-ज्ञानबलैश्वर्यवीर्यशक्तितेजः प्रभृतिसमस्तकल्याणगुणगणमहार्णवपरब्रह्मशब्दाभिधेयपरमपुरुष-याथात्म्यविज्ञानं च, एवंरूपं परावरतत्त्वयाथात्म्यविज्ञानतदभ्यासपूर्वकाहरहरुपचीयमानपरम-पुरुषप्रीत्यैकफलनित्यनैमित्तिककर्मनिषिद्धपरिहारशमदमाद्यात्मगुणनिर्वर्त्यभक्तिरूपतापन्नपरम-पुरुषोपासनैकलभ्यो वेदान्तवेद्यः परमपुरुषो वासुदेवः त्वम् इति ज्ञानं च लब्धम् । ततः च बन्धुस्नेहकारुण्यप्रवृद्धविपरीतज्ञानमूलात् सर्वस्माद् अवसादाद् विमुक्तो गतसंदेहः स्वस्थः स्थितः अस्मि । इदानीम् एव युद्धादिकर्तव्यताविषयं तव वचनं करिष्ये यथोक्तं युद्धादिकं करिष्ये इत्यर्थः । 73 । 'Delusion' or misapprehension is perverted knowledge. By Your grace it has been destroyed. 'Smrti' or memory is the knowledge of things as they really are. I have acquired that. Misapprehension here is the misconception that the self is the Prakrti (body-mind) which is the non-self in reality. It consists in one not apprehending that all intelligentand non-intelligent entities, by reason of their forming the body of the Supreme Being, have Him as their Atman and are thus ensouled by Him. The misapprehension also consists in the lack of knowledge that actions, obligatory and occasional, do not cause bondage but actually form a means for the propitiation of the Supreme Being. All such misapprehensions are now destroyed.The various phases of knowledge that cleared the misunderstanding may be catalogued as follows: (1) The self is different from Prakrti and is therefore devoid of the qualities of Prakrti. Its nature is that of the knower of Prakrti.( 2) The self is a Sesha (sub-ordinate and servant) of the Supreme Person and is ruled by Him. The true knowledge about the Supreme Person is that He is what is signified by the expression Supreme Brahman. (3) He is the great ocean of all auspicious, excellent attributes such as knowledge, strength, glory, valour, power, brilliance etc., which are unbounded and natural. His essence consists solely ofauspiciousness. He is antagonistic to all that is evil without exception. The origin, sustentation and dissolution of the entire universe are His sport. (4) You (Sri Krshna) are Vasudeva, the Supreme Person, known from the Vedanta, and who can be reached only by worship, which has taken the form of Bhakti. (5) Bhakti can be achieved by the control of the senses and the mind, the abandonment of prohibited acts and the performance of occasional and obligatory acts as solely intended for the goal of the satisfaction of the Supreme Person. Bhakti has to be developed day after day through the regular practice of the discriminatoryknowledge of the higher and lower truths. All this has been attained by me (Arjuna).Therefore I stand steadfast, freed from the doubts and devoid of the depression rooted in perverted knowledge nourished by compassion and love for relatives. Now I shall fulfil Your words, concerned with fighting etc., which ought to be done by me. I shall fight as instructed byYou. Such is the meaning.  
618 धृतराष्ट्राय स्वस्य पुत्राः पाण्डवाः च युद्धे किम् अकुर्वत इति पृच्छते संजय उवाच - संजय उवाचइति एवं वासुदेवस्य वसुदेवसूनोः पार्थस्य च तत्पितृष्वसुः पुत्रस्य च महात्मनो महाबुद्धेः तत्पदद्वन्द्वम् आश्रितस्य इमं रोमहर्षणम् अद्भुतं संवादम् अहं यथोक्तम् अश्रौषं श्रुतवान् अहम् । 74 । Sanjaya now relates to Dhrtarashtra who had questioned him earlier as to what his sons and the Pandavas were doing in the battle:Thus, in this way have I been hearing this wondrous and thrilling dialogue, as it took place between Vasudeva, the son of Vasudeva, and His paternal aunt's son Arjuna, who is a Mahatman, one possessed of a great intelligence, and who has resorted to the feet of Sri Krshna.  
619 व्यासप्रसादाद् व्यासानुग्रहेण दिव्यचक्षुःश्रोत्रलाभाद् एतत् परं योगाख्यं गुह्यं योगेश्वराद् ज्ञानबलैश्वर्यवीर्यशक्तितेजसां निधेः भगवतः कृष्णात् स्वयम् एव कथयतः साक्षात् श्रुतवान् अहम् । 75 । By the grace of Vyasa i.e., by the benefit of the divine sense of perception, granted by him, I have heard this supreme mystery called Yoga from Sri Krshna himself - Sri Krshna who is the treasure-house of knowledge, strength, sovereignty, valour, power and brilliance.  
620 केशवार्जुनयोः इमं पुण्यम् अद्भुतं संवादं साक्षाच्छ्रुतं स्मृत्वा मुहुः मुहुः हृष्यामि । 76 । Remembering this auspicious and wondrous dialogue between Sri Krshna and Arjuna, directly heard by me, I rejoice again and again.  
621 तत् च अर्जुनाय प्रकाशितम् ऐश्वरं हरेः अत्यद्भुतं रूपं मया साक्षात्कृतं संस्मृत्य संस्मृत्य हृष्यतो मे महान् विस्मयो जायते पुनः च हृष्यामि । 77 । Great amazement is caused in me, stirred by joy born of the repeated remembrance of that most marvellous and sovereign form of the Lord revealed to Arjuna and directly witnessed by me. I rejoice again and again.  
622 किम् अत्र बहुना उक्तेन -यत्र योगेश्वरः कृत्स्नस्य उच्चावचरूपेण अवस्थितस्य चेतनस्य अचेतनस्य च वस्तुनो ये ये स्वभावयोगाः तेषां सर्वेषां योगानाम् ईश्वरः स्वसंकल्पायत्तस्वेतरसमस्तवस्तुस्वरूपस्थिति-प्रवृत्तिभेदः कृष्णो वसुदेवसूनुः यत्र च पार्थो धनुर्धरः तत्पितृष्वसुः पुत्रः तत्पदद्वन्द्वैकाश्रयः तत्र श्रीः विजयो भूतिः नीतिः च ध्रुवा निश्चला इति मतिः मम इति । 78 । Why say more? Wherever there is Sri Krshna, the son of Vasudeva, the 'Yogesvara' who is the ruler of the various manifestations of Nature pertaining to all intelligent and non-intelligent entities that have high and low forms, and on whose volition depend the differences in the essential natures, existences and the activities of all things other than Himself,and wherever there is Arjuna, the archer, who is his paternal aunt's son and who took sole refuge at His feet - in such places there always will be present fortune, victory, wealth and sound morality. Such is my firm conviction.  
623  
Introduction to Sri रामानुज's गीता-भाष्य 
(By Swami Tapasyananda)

The Fundamental Tenets of the system:

Every Vedantic Acarya has to justify his claim to that
position by writing commentaries or भाष्यs on the three
foundational texts of the वेदान्त - the उपनिषद्s, the
वेदान्त सूत्रs and the भगवद्गीता. Ever since the time
of Sri शङ्कराचार्य, this convention has been in vogue.
Sri रामानुज has produced, besides several original works,
commentaries on all these texts except the first. The reason
for this omission, it is said, is that in the commentary on
the वेदान्त सूत्रs of बादरायण, which are based on the
Upanishads, he has had occasion to comment on most of the
important Upanishadic texts. While the Bhashya on the Sutras,
known as श्रीभाष्य is highly technical and polemical, and
therefore too difficult to enter into except by those who have
mastered the Vedantic way of exegesis, the गीता-भाष्य is
much simpler. It is not polemical at all except in two places.
It can be followed by anyone who has some aptitude for
philosophy and has made some study in that line.
रामानुज's mission in life was to effect a synthesis
between the philosophic tone and methodology of Vedic
learning with the highly emotional songs of the आळ्वार्s, which
brim with pure devotion. However masterly might be the
achievement of this synthesis by रामानुज, the dividing
middle line between these two could be easily perceived by
any careful student of his writings. He lived an unusually
long life of 120 years, and in the course of this, changes
in his outlook, brought about by age and mature experience,
must have taken place. This was probably responsible for
his earlier work, the श्रीभाष्य or the commentary on the
वेदान्त सूत्र's, being more scholastic, and his later works
like the गीताभाष्य being simpler and limited largely to the
exposition of the meanings of the verses in the light of his
general ontological principles that the Supreme Reality is
Personalistic with countless auspicious attributes, and that it
is a qualified Whole of which ईश्वर is the soul, and the
जीव and the जगत् (the soul and material nature), form the
body in inseparable relation with the Whole. It is non-dual
as a Whole, but there are internal divisions of the nature
of modes in it. This is the meaning of calling this doctrine
विशिष्टाद्वैत - Pan-organistic Non-dualism. This
nomenclature was not coined by रामानुज but came to be
used by others afterwards. As far as he is concerned, he
is a Vedantin, and his doctrine, the वेदान्त.
The doctrine is absolute Realism, without any place for
illusion of any kind. There is no category like माया which
is described in अद्वैत as an indeterminate existent -
non-existent entity. रामानुज considers such a description
as a philosophic figment. माया for him is the power of ईश्वर 
and its effects are absolutely real, though changing.
The जीव or the individual self is different from ईश्वर,
though indissolubly connected with Him as His mode. It is
essentially a conscious entity- ज्ञानस्वरूप. Its
consciousness has two aspects. The first is its basic or
substantive consciousness (धर्मि-ज्ञान) and the second,
its attributive-consciousness (धर्म-भूत-ज्ञान). By virtue
of धर्मि-ज्ञान the Jiva is only self-aware. It is the
धर्म-भूत-ज्ञान that makes it aware of others including
ईश्वर. In the state of ignorance, it is almost one with
unconscious matter (प्रकृति), but its धर्मि-ज्ञान keeps
up its individuality and the possibility of developing the
धर्म-भूत-ज्ञान. What stands in the way of this
expansion of धर्म-भूत-ज्ञान is its load of कर्म from
beginningless time. 
It is the creative process of ईश्वर that helps this
development. When fully evolved, it embraces the all-knowing
धर्म-भूत-ज्ञान of ईश्वर Himself .The जीव however
never merges in Him. Its धर्मि-ज्ञान keeps up its
individuality, just as a wick-light maintains its separateness
even when its effulgence becomes submerged in the brilliance
of the sun.
Unconscious matter is known as प्रकृति. It becomes
dynamic by the will of ईश्वर. Its dynamism expresses itself
as the alternating processes of evolution (सृष्टि) and involution
(प्रलय), each of these processes lasting for eons calculable
in terms of our modern conception of light years. This process
of creation and dissolution is a play of Isvara. It, however,
serves the purpose of the जीवs in so far as it is through
this play that the जीव is gradually enabled to overcome the
load of कर्म, which is called technically अज्ञान, and to
develop its धर्म-भूत-ज्ञान.
Involvement of the जीव in this recurring process of प्रकृति
is called संसार. It takes the form of repeated successions
of births and deaths, with quantums of enjoyment and
suffering, determined by the effect of maturing load of
कर्मs called the Prarabdha of the जीवs. Until the जीव
realises Its own nature and relationship with God, It will be
subject to this process. Release from the process is called
salvation or मोक्ष.
The procedures that man must adopt for securing release
are called Yogas or ways of communion. They are generally
designated as कर्म योग, ज्ञान योग and भक्ति योग.
In रामानुज's system one more is added - प्रपत्ति or
unreserved resignation to the Lord. It is such resignation that
evokes God's grace, which alone can eradicate the load of
कर्म that persists from time without beginning. Bhakti must
end in Prapatti.
मोक्ष in the fullest sense is attained only with the fall
of the present physical body, after which the released जीव
is clothed in a body of शुद्ध-सत्त्व with which It is able
to commune with God and experience His overpoweringly
august but loving presence through eternity .
In the state of bondage the जीव is under the domination
of the 'I-sense', which is the perverse ego arising from
association with the body. In a dog's body, the जीव has a
dog-ego; in an elephant's body, an elephant-ego, and in a
man's body, a human ego. What we generally call our sense
of independence is the expression of this pseudo-ego which
forms the Gordian knot of bondage. The जीव is really a शेष
(a servant or liege) of God, forming, as It does, His body.
And the Supreme Being is Its शेषि, the Lord and Master .
The शेष cannot exist in independence of the शेषि in the
Pan-organistic system of Ramanuja. So this sense of
pseudo-independence is the result of ignorance and true
devotion dawns when this is replaced by the natural sense
of dependence of the शेष or the शेषि. Such a sense of
dependence is not a deprivation of freedom. It is
estalblishment in spiritual strength. The शेषि is never a source
of fear. For, He, the Supreme Being, is शरणागत-वत्सल
- a lover of those who seek shelter in Him, just as a cow
is of its calf (Vatsa). He cannot subsist without such devotees,
as devotees cannot exist without Him. So this Divine Bondage
is a state of Supreme Bliss.

The Difference between भाष्यs and Interpretation of 
Researchers

These are some of the fundamental doctrines of Ramanuja's
metaphysics and religion. A भाष्य or a commentary on an
accepted text is written with a view to show that the tradition
which the commentator represents has the support of the text.
Such a method involves some text-torturing to get the meaning
one wants, and is for this reason held at a discount by modern
free-lance researchers who seek to find out if there is any
real meaning for the texts apart from any particular tradition.
Most of such interpretations of the researchers turn out to
be grotesque caricatures of the texts. Their method is
generally analytical. They try to discover many layers of
thought and authorship responsible for them.
In a Text like the Gita where there is an attempt to
reconcile several of the then prevailing systems of thought,
and where technical words like ब्रह्मन्, आत्मन्, प्रकृति,
कूटस्थ, अक्षर, etc., are used in varying meanings in
different places, it is easy to discover and attribute these
so-called incongruities to different layers of thought originating
from different authors. Thus the गीता has been analysed into
some sixteen strands by Prof. Otto and he has concluded
that the same number of authors must have set their hands
on the present Gita text. Such destructive forays of research
are more a display of imagination and ingenuity than of
constructive scholarship. 
The आचार्यs effort at interpreting Texts in the light of a
particular spiritual and philosophical tradition appears more
reasonable and satisfying than the works of such researchers.
A sacred Text like the गीता can contain messages suitable
for different types of aspirants, and the different
interpretations of the same Text by different आचार्यs can
be taken as an elucidation of those meanings with the aid
of the religious and philosophical traditions which each of
them represents. To impart a sense of consistency of a Text
to their followers, they are compelled to give interpretations
that may sometimes look as far-fetched to others.
Sanskrit words fundamental to the understanding of the
गीता, like ब्रह्मन्, आत्मन्, अक्षर, अव्यक्त, माया, पुरुष
etc., had undergone vast changes in respect of their usage
and meaning in the course of millennia during which the
language has been developing. Consequently, interpreters
belonging to different systems have given divergent meanings
to passages containing such words to conform to the
philosophic traditions which each of them represents. It is
this that looks like text-torturing. But this kind of torture
however leaves the organism of the texts very much alive,
whereas that inflicted by the researchers ends in its death.

Yamuna and Ramanuja
In his गीता commentary, Ramanuja faithfully follows the
analysis of the text by his great predecessor यामुनाचार्य
in his short metrical work of 32 verses known as
गीतार्थ-सङ्ग्रह. According to this work, the गीता of 18
chapters is divided into three hexads. The first hexad or group
of six chapters deals with the self (individual soul) and of
the means of attaining It, which consists in ज्ञान योग and
कर्म योग. The next hexad deals with the Supreme Lord
who is नारायण, the seat of all power and auspicious
attributes. He alone can give salvation. Salvation is a matter
of His grace. None the less one has to be worthy to be
the recipient of that grace. That worthiness is attained through
the practice of Bhakti which develops with the dawn of
knowledge of the self preceded by the performance of duties
(Karma Yoga). In the last group of six chapters many of
the details of the topics of both the earlier hexads are treated
for supplementing and completing them.

A Survey of the Bhashya: The First Hexad

The above guidelines are followed in Ramanuja's
commentary. Glowing descriptions of the attributes of
Narayana, however, occur in all parts of the work. The
commentary starts with a long chain of attributes of Narayana
and a narration of his advent on earth as Sri Krishna and
appearance in the battle field of Kuru-kshetra, so that all could
see Him even with their physical eyes. The actual commentary
starts with the first exhortation of Krishna to Arjuna to do
his duty on the battle field, which he was reluctant to perform,
because it would involve the slaughter of his kith and kin
and the destruction of his whole clan. It is pointed out that
this resolve to abstain from his duty as a Kshatriya leader
was born of the false notion that man is only a body (Prakrti)
and its destruction means extinction of the whole entity known
as man. This false idea can be removed only by the knowledge
of the truth about oneself that one is essentially the Atman - in
Ramanuja's terminology the Brahman.
The use of this word in surprisingly different meanings
makes the interpretation of the Gita Text a difficult task.
The word Brahman comes, according to philologists, from the
root ' Brah' which means vastness, power, growth etc. Based
on this the word Brahman has come to denote the Supreme
Being, Veda, Prakrti and according to Ramanuja, the Atman
also. The explanation offered by some scholars of his school
for deriving the last meaning is as follows: The vast Being,
who is 'cit-acit visishtam' (i.e. qualified by both conscious and
unconscious entities or has got both Cit and Acit as His body)
is the Supreme Being or Brahman. Prakrti is the vast Being
(Brahman) that is Acit-visistam, i.e. qualified by insentiency
only. And Atman or individual soul is the vast Being
(Brahman) that is Cit-visishtam, i.e. qualified only by Cit or
consciousness.
In this sense Ramanuja, to the surprise of people who are
generally accustomed to the usage of the word Brahman to
denote the Supreme Being only, uses the word Brahman to
mean the Atman also in the Gita commentary. To
differentiate this usage, we have put the word in italics
wherever it means the Atman or the self. The individual soul
is Anu, atomic, in Ramanuja's system. This expression is used
not to indicate size, but to convey its identity in different
transmigrations. Besides, Its individuality is not lost even in
liberation. In that state Its attributive knowledge becomes fully
expanded and co-terminous with that of Isvara Himself. It
becomes Vibhu (unlimited) in this sense also and is therefore
Brahman.
Ramanuja himself gives, in commenting on the second line
of Gita Ch.13.12 Anadi matparam brahma na sat tan
nasad ucyate - his justification for interpreting Brahman
as Atman. 'Mat-para' means 'one with Me (isvara) as one's
superior. Who is that one? It is Brahman, i.e., the Atman
who is the liege (Sesha) of isvara. And the Atman is associated
with the quality of 'infinite extensiveness' in Its pristine state.
Its being conditioned by the body is only brought about by
Karma and is temporary. This conditioning is only in the state
of bondage. When the Atman is released from bondage, It
regains Its pristine nature which is 'unlimited', and so It can
be described as Brahman, as the Sruti and the Gita do in
many places, which are quoted in the commentary.
In the same way Ramanuja establishes the meanings of
the words Akshara and Kutastha, so important for making a
meaning out of verse 16 of Ch.15, as 'the Atman in the
liberated state'. In his interpretation of verse 1 of Ch.12 and
of that chapter as a whole, it is pointed out that those who
commune directly with Isvara are called Bhaktas while those
who practise meditation on the Atman are denoted by the
expression 'aspirants who follow the path of the Akshara'
In Its essential nature the Atman is unaffected by any of
the transformations of Its material vestments of body-mind.
Thus weapons cannot cut It, fire cannot burn It, wind cannot
dry It, in fact nothing can destroy It. Not knowing this truth
Arjuna wanted to abandon his duty - here leading his clansmen
in war, and take to a hermit's  life. His idea was that thereby
he would be saving himself from the path of sin and treading
the path to peace and perfection.
Here Ramanuja enters into a polemical exercise. While the
Gita-bhashya as a whole is not polemical but is only an
elaboration of the meanings of the verses in the light of the
Visishtadvaita teachings, here in respect of the 12th verse of
the 2nd chapter, Ramanuja enters into a debate with the
doctrines of Bhaskara and of the Advaitin, the former
maintaining the Upadhi (adjunct) doctrine and the latter the
Ignorance (Avidya) doctrine. In this verse the lord positively
asserts that the Atmans are different from Him and that they
are many. No Upadhi or adjunct is needed to account for
the multiplicity of Jivas. The Advaita doctrine of Avidya tries
to explain this fact away. Ramanuja controverts this by
pointing out the absurdity into which this will land one. The
only other place in the Bhashya where he enters into a polemic
with Advaitins is, in interpreting the 2nd verse of the 13th
Chapter, wnere the Text deals with the distinction between
Kshetra and Kshetrajna.
To free Arjuna from the false identification of the Essence
in man with the body, Sri Krishna preaches to him that what
he, Arjuna, proposed to do will only be a path to infamy
on earth and perdition hereafter. Such is the consequence
of abandoning Svadharma or duty in life determined by one's
inherent nature and status and station in life. The real path
to higher evolution lies through Karma Yoga and Jnana
Yoga - the paths of work and of  knowledge. Though they
two look different as paths, the end they seek is the same.
Nay, even as paths they are mutually involved. Jnana Yoga,
which consists in the cultivation of a mental attitude that
is exclusively riveted on the Atman (Atmavalokana-buddhi),
can be fortified only through the long practice of Karma Yoga.
Next, though the path of pure Jnana Yoga is theoretically
possible, practically it is impossible for anyone with body
consciousness to follow it. Still more, even if one succeeds
to some extent in this discipline, it is always accompanied
by the threat of a fall; for, the Vasanas or the tendencies
in the mind are so strong that they are likely to blow away
the mind of even a knowing one, just as the wind does in
regard to a ship on the high seas.
Karma Yoga on the other hand is suited to all aspirants
and is like a right royal road for all travellers. It consists
in the discharge of all works ordained by the Vedas. They
are of three kinds - the daily obligatory duties, the occasional
duties, and desire-prompted works, the last being purely
optional. Karma-Yoga consists in performing all these without
an eye on their fruits. To maintain such an attitude in all
these works, one must have the knowledge of being the Atman
at the core and not the body-mind. To that extent Jnana
Yoga is involved in Karma Yoga.
It is also pointed out that in Sri Krishna's view even those
who are competent to practise Jnana Yoga should resort only
to Karma Yoga - first because there is nothing in it that
obstructs the growth of Jnana and next because one will
thereby be setting the right example for the vast majority
to follow.
Thus in Ramanuja's system there is nothing like the bogey
of Jnana-Karma-Samuccaya (combination of knowledge and
work) as in Advaita. On the other hand, they should be
combined, as there is no mutual contradiction, and as such
combination is necessary for the harmonious development of
one's spiritual life. Such is the main teaching of the first group of 
six chapters.

The Second Hexad: Bhakti Yoga

1. Nature of Bhakti

In the second hexad beginning with the seventh chapter
and ending with the 12th, the doctrine of Bhakti is elaborated,
as also the theology of Vishnu - Narayana. Bhakti (as
distinguished from Prapatti) is in this system an edifice built
on the foundation of Jnana and not a mere preparatory
discipline for Jnana as in the Advaita. The meaning of Jnana,
however, differs vastly in the two systems. In the Advaita
it is the intuitive understanding that the Jiva is one with Isvara.
In Ramanuja's Visistadvaita it consists, at the lower level,
in being established in the understanding that one is the Atman
and not mere body-mind. One who has achieved this is called
in the Gita a Sthita-prajna. An aspirant who has achieved
this state gets the continuous memory of Isvara who is the
Over-lord (Seshi) to whom he is the liege (Sesha). This
realisation of one's right relation with Isvara is the higher
aspect of Jnana that helps devotion to attain to its fullest
maturity. The higher Jnana and the higher Bhakti are the
obverse and the reverse of the same coin.
The continuous and unobstructed flow of consciousness
towards Narayana is Bhakti in its highest form. The
manifestation of this in the Jiva occurs when he is first
established in Atman-consciousness or Atmtivalokanabuddhi. 
Until this is achieved the load of Karma from
beginningless time acts as an insurmountable damper
obstructing the flow of memory towards the Lord.
In the achievement of this stable Bhakti, a kind of
preparatory Bhakti is practicable even from the beginning. For
this purpose, in the practice of Karma Yoga informed by
Jnana, there is an important part which consists in the
discharge of daily, occasional and desire-prompted actions.
Now these actions can be performed, as offerings to
purushottama, the Supreme Being. That is a kind of Bhakti
which all aspirants at all stages are capable of practising.
Besides, there are other aids to devotion like worship of
images in temples, visits to holy places, singing the Lord's
name and glories, contact with holy men, etc.
But it is only when the Atman-consciousness is established
in the aspirant that constant and continuous flow of
consciousness towards Narayana, just as of oil that is being
poured from one vessel to another, can be maintained. That
alone is the highest form of Bhakti, described by such
expressions as Para-bhakti and Parama-bhakti. [Prapatti is the
direct path to God while Bhakti requires a foundation of
Jnana.]

2. Description of the Supreme Being

Another topic that looms large in the second hexad is the
description of the Supreme Being. He is the origin, support
and the dissolving ground of the whole universe. Though He
is distinct from and unaffected by it, He is one Whole, with
the animate Nature (Jiva) and inanimate Nature (Jagat)
forming His two powers or Prakrtis. These two powers
(Jiva-Jagat) constitute the Cosmos which forms His body.
The body-soul (Sarira-Sariri) relationship between Isvara
and His Prakrtis (i.e. the Cosmos consisting of Jivas and
of inanimate matter) is used by Ramanuja to interpret the
Mahavakya of the Vedanta, 'Tat Tvam Asi' in accordance
with the concept of Samanadhikaranya, translated as
co-ordinate predication and sometimes as grammatical
co-ordination. The literal meaning of the word is 'the relation
of abiding in a common substratum.' The scholastics of
Vedanta have differentiated ten kinds of Samanadhikaranya.
To understand Ramanuja's position, we shall take here only
two of these into account. viz., Aikya- Samanadhikaranya
(co-ordinate predication in terms of identity) and Guna-Gunin-
Samanadhikaranya (co-ordinate predication in terms of
substance and attribute). The former is favoured by Advaita
Vedantins and the latter by Ramanuja's Visishtadvaitins.
The Vedantic Texts state their whole meaning in aphoristic
statements called Mahavakyas. One of the most famous of
these is Tat Tvam Asi - That Thou art, which declares some
kind of identity between Tat (That) or the Supreme Being
and Tvam (Thou) or the Jiva. The Vedantic Acaryas have
to show how this statement fits into their systems. How can
the little embodied being called the Jiva be identical with
the Supreme Creator isvara? The pure Advaita system of
Sankara overcomes the difficulty by recourse to what is
technically called Lakshana or indirect meaning of words.
Words can have a direct as well as an indirect implied
meaning. Where the direct meanings are found inadequate
to make a sensible meaning, indirect meaning (lakshana) has
to be resorted to. In the case of 'Tat Tvam Asi' the indirect
meanings of the two terms are taken and interpreted as having
a common reference or substratum. They are thus shown
to be in apposition, which, it is claimed, is Samanadhikaranya
or co-ordinate predication.
As an illustration let us take the statement: 'This is that
Devadatta', with regard to a person seen in Madras in a small
room in an unhealthy condition first, and afterwards in
Bombay in a nice flat in a healthy condition. Then we say
'This is that Devadatta'. Here the 'This' and the 'That' refer
to an identical person under different adventitious conditions.
When bereft of these adventitious conditions, it can only imply
an identity of the person. We then get the two terms 'This'
and 'That' in a relation of apposition - the same as 
Samanadhikaranya.
Ramanuja objects to this way of deriving the meaning of
the Mahavakya on two grounds. First when a direct meaning
of an expression is sufficient, it is illegitimate to seek an
indirect implied meaning (Lakshana), as done in the Advaitic
interpretation of the Mahavakya. Next, the Mahavakya
recognises 'Thou' and 'That' as different, and what is required
is not to interpret the Text in a way that denies this difference,
which would be doing violence to the Text, but to find out
wherein their unity lies. Both the terms have their different
identities but there is something in common between them
bringing them together into a unity, and the correct
interpretation of the Mahavakya should bring out that unifying
principle. Removing all the attributes from both the terms
and establishing a bare identity of both is not true apposition
(Samanadhikaranya). It is only tautology or repetition. The
expression Samanadhikaranya implies two or more attributes
having an identity of reference in one substratum
(Adhikarana). For example, there is the expression 'Blue
lotus'. Here 'blueness' and 'lotus nature' inhere in a common
substratum without losing their individualities.
Samanadhikaranya indicates such a subsistence of many
attributes in a common substratum and not a bare identity
as conceived in the Advaitic interpretation. Ramanuja claims
that his  doctrine of Body-Soul (Sarira- Sariri) relationship
between Isvara and the Cosmos as a whole on the one hand,
and with every Jiva individually on the other, can alone
properly accommodate this doctrine of identity without losing
the individualities of the terms involved. The Almighty God
and the little Jiva can never be equated with each other .
But the mighty Isvara, who is the Indweller in the Cosmic
Body, is also the Indweller in every Jiva. Thus every Jiva
individually is the body of isvara, just as the Cosmos as
a whole too is. In the Great Sentence 'Tat Tvam Asi' , the
'Tat' refers to isvara as the Indweller of the Cosmic Body,
and 'Tvam ' to the same isvara who indwells the Jiva also,
and who as such has got the Jiva too as His body. Thus
all the bodies, the Cosmic and individual, are held together
in an indissoluble adjectival relationship (Apruthak-siddhi) in
one and the same isvara. 'Tat Tvam Asi' refers to this oneness
of isvara. This is an interpretation in which only direct
meanings of the words are taken and the conditions of
Samanadhikaranya are fulfilled in all respects.
The Body-Soul (Sarira-Sariri) relationship of the universe
and Isvara is put in different ways to bring out all the
implications of such relationship. God is called the Prakari
or substance, and the Jiva and Jagat, His Prakaras or modes.
The mode of a substance is only a projection of the substance,
and has no existence apart from the substance. For example
there is the water in the ocean and its waves. The waves,
which we see as distinct from the water of the ocean as
a whole, cannot however be separated from the ocean. It
is only a projection of the water and is indivisible from it,
and can have no existence separate from it. In the relation
between Isvara and the Jiva-Jagat, this distinction between
them is, however, eternal and in the nature of things. The
Prakaras or modes are manifested distinctly in the effect
condition (Srushti), and in a latent or invisible state in Pralaya
or the causal condition. In both states they are distinct but
not different from the Whole. Their relation is called
Aprthak-siddha, viz., non-separable and adjectival distinct
existence.

The relation is also described as Sesha-Seshi bond. Seshi
means, Principal or Master, and Sesha the subordinate or liege.
The Seshas exist for the use and the purposes of the Seshi.
In the realisation of this subservience to the Seshi abides the
greatest delight of the Seshas. They find the real meaning of
their existence in such realisation.

As the Jiva-Jagat constitutes His body and His Prakaras
(modes), He can be called the material cause of the universe.
For, the universe is completely moulded by His will. He is
also the instrumental cause of the universe, (Nimitta-Karana)
in their evolution and dissolution.

His one will functions as the energy moving the whole
universe according to the proclivities that the Karma of every
entity involved in the creative process generates. Thus He
is the one and only agent in the universe, but thereby the
freedom of will, essential for moral responsibility of the Jivas,
is not denied. The Karmas of the Jivas are what make them
work in a particular way; but without God's sanctioning will
behind, these Karmas cannot attain fulfilment.
The idea can be illustrated by the following example: In
a great workshop there is a vast assemblage of wheels, cogs,
shafts, belts, etc., moving in different ways, as they are
designed. All their movements, variegated and peculiar to
each, can be traced ultimately to the power coming from
a big power house. The cogs and wheels of Jivas are set
in different directions by their Karma quanta, but they can
function only according to the will of the great Power-house,
the God of the universe.

3. Divine Mystery and Majesty

Bhakti is generated by the contemplation of the Divine
mystery and the Divine majesty. So these are graphically
described in chapter after chapter of this hexad. His mystery
consists in that He manifests this universe of living and
non-living beings and dwells in them also as their Soul. But
at the same time it is not they that contain Him but He
who contains them. For, being subtler than the subtlest thing
imaginable, He can pervade everything without being in the
least affected or limited by them. His pervading everything
does not make Him a prisoner within them; for, His will
is their support from without, and His pervasion, their support
from within, as of the beads of a rosary on a string. Of
this Divine mystery the Lord says in the Gita. Ch.9: " All
this world is pervaded by Me as the unmanifest Being. All
objects subsist in Me, not I in them. And yet objects do
not abide in Me; Behold My mysterious Divine Power -
Source and Support of all things yet not abiding in them (i.e.,
not limited by them)."

His Majesty consists in being the All-Creator. He is the
only Being who is free from subjection to the operation of
the law of Karma. Free from its hold, He distributes and
makes operative the Karmas of all other beings up to Brahma.
At the end of the cosmic cycle, the whole universe dissolves
into His Prakrti (Nature) and becomes latent in it, and at
the beginning of the new cycle it comes out of that Nature.
Both in the latent and the patent conditions the universe
constitutes His body over which He has absolute control. But
these activities do not in any way bind Him, because He
remains detached and unaffected in their midst.
His majesty is further declared by an enumeration of His
Vibhutis or glorious manifestations subtle and gross, which
cover all the higher faculties and all entities exceptionally
powerful, good and glorious in the whole universe - nay,
it is declared that with a fragment of His being He supports
this infinite universe and remains unchanged and transcendent.
To contemplate on His essence in all that is glorious and
impressive is to get thrilled with devotional experience and
maintain perpetual ecstatic communion with Him. To those
who are thus steadfast in spiritual communion, with all their
vital energies centred in Him, He bestows that illumination
of understanding by which they come to Him. Out of
compassion for them, He, residing within as their innermost
Self, destroys the darkness born of ignorance in them by
the luminous lamp of wisdom.

4. He is a God of Love also

He is not only a God of mystery and majesty, but also
a God of love, to whom the devotee is very dear. Though
there is none equal to, or greater than, Him, and though
endowed with power that none can resist, He is none the
less the Father of all moving and unmoving beings. He is
the most worshipful, and the greatest of all Teachers. To
those who adore Him by an act of supreme self-surrender ,
He becomes gracious, and He pardons all their shortcomings
as a father forgives those of his son and a lover forgives
those of his beloved. Is He then partial? No, He is equal
to all, but in the case of those who put all their trust in
Him and surrender to Him, they are in Him and He is in
them. He is thus not a mere impersonal being or a centre
of irresistible power like gravity or electrical energy. He is
a God of love who responds to prayer and self-surrender
and possesses all the blessed attributes in an infinite degree.
This is the significance of describing Him as personal.

He is the only being who accepts, all worship and grants
their fruits. Even those who worship other deities without
knowing that Narayana is the Supreme Being, are really
worshipping Narayana only but without knowing this fact. For,
Narayana resides in all, to receive worship offered under any
name, and to bestow the fulfilmnents sought by devotees. But
as these worshippers do not know this and are actuated by
faith in different deities, the results they get are petty and
short-lived.

His worship is very simple. The sole requisite for it is
sincere devotion. Whoever makes an offering to Him with
devotion - be it of flower, leaf or water - that devout
offering made by a pure-hearted person, He accepts with
joy. Besides this ritualistic offering, man is exhorted to make
a total offering of all his physical and mental activities:
"Whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever you offer
in sacrifice, whatever you give in charity, whatever austerity
you perform do that as an offering unto Me." This is
real renunciation, Sannyasa, and one who does accordingly
is freed from the bonds of Karma, attains liberation and goes
to Him.

The God of love that He is, His grace extends even to
sinners and those who are generally considered low-born and
unfit for spiritual emancipation. It is therefore declared 'Even
a confirmed sinner, if he worships Me with unwavering faith
and devotion, must indeed be considered righteous, for he
has taken the right resolve. Soon will he become righteous
and attain to lasting peace. No devotee of mine will ever
perish.'

The Gita divides devotees into four classes - Arta (one
seeking relief from misery), Jijnasu (one in quest of the
Atman), Artharthi (one seeking some fulfilment of worldly
objects like wealth) and Jnani (the knowing one). According
to the Gita all these are Udarah (generous), but the Jnani
is said to be considered by the Lord as His own Atma (self).
Ramanuja reduces these four classes into three. The Arta
and Artharthi are classed together into one, as some worldly
objective is common to both of them. The other two are
separated from them - the Jijnasu whose quest is for the
Atman and the Jnani who has no quest but in its stead feels
supreme satisfaction in the realisation of his servantship
(Seshatva) to God who is his Seshi (liege-lord or supporter).
Such a devotee is as dear to the Lord as a calf is to the
mother cow. This conception of the Jnani emphasises his
inseparable closeness to the Lord and not the oneness of
the Jiva with the Lord, as in Advaita. The context is against
such an interpretation implying identity. The Lord cannot
subsist without such Jnani devotees to love, and the Jnani
cannot carry on his existence without the consciousness of
this loving relation to the Lord. This inseparable relation
between them is what is meant by speaking of the Jnani
as His very self. This is also the meaning of the famous
passage " Vasudevah sarvam iti -Vasudeva is all." In the
context where it occurs, it cannot mean the effacement of
all by Vasudeva. It expresses the idea that Vasudeva is the
all in all, the Supreme Value and End for man and that He
alone is the means for attaining Him.

5. The Cosmic Form

The summit of the exposition of the Divine Being is reached
when, in response to Arjuna's request to be given the actual
experience of the Supreme Divine, he is granted the intuitive
power to perceive It, and he experiences the Cosmic Form
of the Lord. In that Limitless Form, in one spot Arjuna saw
the whole universe with the infinite prakrti and countless Jivas
and the numerous spheres and species of beings like Devas,
Asuras, Gandharvas and several others - all spread out, not
as a chaotic multiplicity but as the modes of a unifying
substratum which is the Divine. He saw all that our ordinary
understanding reveals as past, present and future, co-existing
as a simultaneous divisionless instant, giving him a glimpse
of what is known as omniscience. The battle of Kurukshetra
which is yet to be fought, he found already commenced and
completed in the vision bestowed on him. And he exclaims
"All these hosts of kings, along with the sons of Dhrutarashtra,
Bhishma, Drona, and Karna, as also the principal warriors
on our side - all rushing headlong into Thy fearful mouth
set with terrible fangs. Some are seen with their heads crushed
and caught in the gaps of Thy teeth. As swift-flowing waters
of numerous rivers rush verily towards the sea, so these
heroes among them are rushing into Thy glowing mouth. As
moths swarm swiftly into a flaming fire and perish, so do
these men rush headlong into Thy mouth to meet with sure
destruction."

Awe-stricken, Arjuna asks Him to reveal His identity and
explain how He is functioning. He gets the reply that what
he is seeing is His manifestation as Time, in which all beings
are generated, sustained and consumed. Arjuna' s reluctance
to fight is described as misplaced, as all the fighting and
destruction is being done by the Lord Himself, and what
Arjuna is going to do is only to be a semblance of His
instrument in this task.

The vision of the super-mundane glory of the Cosmic Form
of the Lord fills Arjuna with utter shuddering awe, and he
prays to Him, whom he was accustomed till now to look
upon as his comrade, to appear in His usual gentle form
as Krshna. Resuming that gentle form, the Lord tells Arjuna
whose mind got recomposed: "This form of Mine which you
have seen is extremely difficult to behold. Neither by Vedic
study, nor austerities, nor by charity, nor by sacrifice can
one behold Me in the way you have done. Through
unswerving devotion for Me only can this form of Mine be
known in truth, experienced and entered into. Whoever works
for Me looking upon Me as the goal, whoever is My devotee,
free from attachments and from antagonism to any being -
such a man shall enter into Me."
In interpreting the significance of these instructions,
Ramanuja specially points out that it is not a criticism of
Vedic study, sacrifice, austerity, charity etc., nor a
characterisation of them as useless. The idea is to emphasise
that they are causes of promoting liberation to the extent
that they are suffused with exclusive devotion to the Lord.
In the next chapter entitled Bhakti Yoga, which marks the
conclusion of the middle hexad, it is pointed out that the
purport of the whole section is to explain the superiority and
directness and quick fruition of the pure path of devotion
to the Lord, compared with the path of work (Karma Yoga)
expounded in the earlier hexad. This is given in reply to
Arjuna's question "Who are the better knowers of Yoga -
those devotees, who are ever united with you with continuous
worship of the type described, or those who meditate on
the Akshara (the Indestructible) and Avyakta (the Unclear)."
In the Advaitic interpretations the Akshara and the Avyakta
are interpreted as the changeless and formless Being, i.e.,
the Impersonal Absolute. But according to Ramanuja these
words describe the Jiva in Its pristine nature. The Jivas
unconnected with Prakrti i.e, body-mind, are centres of
changeless and indestructible consciousness (i.e., Akshara),
which are exactly alike in all body-minds, and they are also
Avyakta (unclear) in the sense that they cannot be perceived
by the senses. The Jiva is further described as Anirdesya
(not subject to verbal definition); as Sarvatraga (pervading
everywhere, i.e., in the bodies of the countless beings of the

universe as diverse individualities), and as Acintya not
graspable by thought). All these epithets indicate for
Ramanuja the nature of the individual selves who form the
object of meditation of those who practise Jnana Yoga, the
path of pure knowledge - and not of a Nirguna Brahman, a
conception that he does not accept as scriptural. Therefore
the question of Arjuna is who understands Yoga better -
the one who is devoted to the Supreme Isvara or the one
who meditates on the pure self. The clear answer of the
Lord is that, though both these types of aspirants ultimately
reach the same goal, the devotee is following a better path:
First of all, for an embodied being, i.e., one with body
consciousness, concentration on the pure self and feeling that
It is his real nature is very difficult. Secondly resignation to
the Lord is the more direct and easier path; for in the case
of one who does so ardently, the Lord Himself becomes the
redeemer .
It is in the light of this doctrine that Ramanuja interprets
the rather obscure succeeding four verses of the Gita. In
these verses Jnana (knowledge of the self) is first stated to
be superior to Abhyasa or repeated practice to remember
the Lord by one who takes to Bhakti Yoga directly without
going through the path of Akshara, i.e, knowledge of the self.
Such a devotee is asked to take to Abhyasa or repeated
practice to fix the mind on the Lord. Afterwards it is stated
that meditation or continuous one-pointed thought (Dhyana)
is superior to Jnana. And then it is enigmatically stated that
abandonment of fruits of works (Karmaphala) is superior even
to Dhyana. The reason given is that through such
abandonment, peace results immediately. How Jnana Yoga
can be thus circumvented is explained in the next para.
Ramanuja solves this enigma posed by the claim for
superiority of abandonment of fruits of action over Dhyana,
Jnana and Abhyasa by his theory that success in all these
can be achieved only after the effects of sinful Karmas have
been eliminated. This achievement is possible only through
works done as offering to the Lord, without any eye on their
fruits. Thus the abandonment of the fruits of Karma
(Karma-phala-tyaga) is the genesis of all real spiritual
development. And for one who has achieved this and
possesses absolute faith and spirit of surrender to the Lord,
the pure path of devotion is possible. He is not required to
follow Jnana Yoga that establishes one in Atman-
consciousness 
and then indirectly generates devotion to the 
Lord.

6. Distinction between Moksha and Kaivalya

There are differences of opinion among the savants of
Sri Vaishnavism regarding the final end of spiritual efforts.
They distinguish between two kinds of the released state of
the Jiva. Ramanuja hirnself is not clear on this point, but
his view is said to be reflected in his comments on verse
22 of Chapter 8 of the Gta. These two states are
distinguished as Kaivalya and Moksha. Kaivalya means the state
of aloofness. In Kaivalya the Jiva is liberated from bodily
vestments and is established in Its pristine nature as
bliss-consciousness. Each Jiva is aloof from Prakrti and the
other Jivas, and is absorbed in Its own self such a Jiva
has a realisation of the Supreme Being also, but only as the
Indweller pervading It. The Jiva in Kaivalya is debarred from
the highest enlightenment consisting in the experience of being
a Sesha or liege of the Lord, Its Seshi or Master. The realisation
of the liegehood also involves the knowledge that It is the
body of the Lord along with all Jivas and Prakrti. This is
Moksha consisting in complete Jnana and Bhakti, and it has
to be distinguished from mere Kaivalya. Some schools
maintain that this Kaivalya state is eternal and is an inferior
state, while others hold that it is temporary and will ultimately
lead to, fullfledged Moksha consisting in the realisation of the
Jiva's Seshahood also.

To a critical student this distinction would appear to be
unsubstantial. It is maintained that on the dawning of Atman-
consciousness on the Jiva, the highest Bhakti is generated,
and continuous and unbroken Smrti (remembrance) directed to
the Lord springs automatically. This must necessarily involve
also the realisation of one's liegehood (Seshatva) to the Lord.
It may be that the Prapatti (resignation) practised from the
start of one's spiritual life brings about the Atman-
consciousness and sense of liegehood at the same time without
the indirect method of first attaining Atman-consciousness
(Atmavalokana- buddhi) as a basis for the dawn of one's
liegehood to the Lord.

7. Tension between the Paratva and the Saulabhya of God

From the foregoing review of Ramanuja's commentary on
the secohd hexad of the Gita, where the Divine Being is
described, it will be seen that the commentator is taking great
pains to depict the two poles in Divine nature - its
transcendence (Paratva) and its easy accessibility (Saulabhya).
His Paratva (transcendence) is depicted in such ideas as: "His
having a transcendent Form in the Divine Realm of Vaikuntha
that is inaccessible even to Brahma and Siva; His remaining
as the Supreme manifesting the whole universe by a fragment
of His Being; His being both the container and the contained
in regard to the universe but yet being not at all affected
by it; His being the will operating the whole universe like
objects put on a turning wheel, periodically dissolving it into
its causal condition and bringing it out into the manifested
state; and above all in the description of His Cosmic Form
in which He reveals the past, present and future of the whole
universe in a single spot of His being.

Side by side with it is depicted His Saulabhya or easy
accessibility. Easy accessibility does not mean that He is very
cheap. It means that out of condescension He reveals Himself
easily to one who yearns for Him and has unswerving devotion
to Him. To such a person He is Sulabha (easily obtained),
as declared in verse 14 of Chapter 8 of the Gita. Such a
devotee is called a Jnani. He depends on God as a calf
on its mother cow, and reciprocally God cannot subsist
without him by His side.

Another side of His accessibility (Saulabhya) is in His role
as the Redeemer. Just as He is the All-creator transcending
all, He is the Redeemer of all Jivas. His redemptive love
for Jivas is shown in His role as the Incarnation when He
takes a human form and shares the life of man without losing
His divine nature. An Incarnation is described by Ramanuja
as Jagad-upakrti-manusha - one who for world-welfare
becomes man while still retaining His Divinity. Ramanuja gives
a very graphic account of this specially in his Introduction
to the Gita-bhasya wherein he elaborates side by side both
the ideas of the Paratva (transcendence) and Saulabhya
(accessibility) of the Lord. The Vaishnava savants have given
a telling illustration of this by the analogy of a tall elephant
bending down to the ground. Small men who stand before
the elephant and desiring to get upon it, cannot do so when
it stands. But if the elephant bends its forehead and touches
the earth, all who want can easily mount it. But the elephant
even when bending down, does not give up its elephantine
nature. Such is a Divine Incarnation. Srikrishna' s appearance
on the field of battle as Arjuna's charioteer so that all could
see Him, is elaborately described by Ramanuja in his
Introduction to the Gita-bhashya, as an illustration of God's
love for man as also of His transcendence as the All-creator
in His divine Realm of Vaikuntha.

The Third Hexad

In the last hexad from 13th to 18th Chapter, the subjects
of Atman, Prakrti and the Supreme Being, expounded in the
first two hexads, are further examined in detail along with
disquisitions on how the Gunas of Prakrti bind the Atman,
and it ends with the assertion of the supremacy of devotion
to the One Vasudeva and self - surrender to Him as the right
royal road to salvation. First in the 13th chapter Prakrti is
demonstrated as the object seen (the Kshetra or the Field)
and the Purusha as the Seer (the Kshetrajna or Field-knower).
This is a logical proof of the body-mind, which is a part
of Prakrti, being different from the Atman (described also
as Brahman). The various evolutes of Prakrti, which constitute
the body, are then analysed, and the mental disciplines for
overcoming the hold of Prakrti are enumerated under the
descriptive epithet Jnana.
From the 14th chapter to the 17th, in order to elaborate
how Prakrti maintains its hold on the Purusha, the three Gunas

of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas and their functioning on all
aspects of human life are elaborately described. It is pointed
out how the extreme dominance of Tamas generates what
is called the demoniac nature which leads the soul to Naraka
(purgatory), whose three gates are described as sexuality,
anger and greed.

Among these chapters, the 18th Chapter called Purushottama
Yoga, is of special importance, as it forms the bedrock of
the metaphysics of the Gita. It is clearly pointed out that
there are three entities - Kshara (the changeful body-entangled
Jiva) and the Akshara or the changeless Atman which is
described as the Kutastha, the uniform and the homogeneous.
The latter are the liberated souls taken as a collectivity
(indicated by the singular number). These liberated Jivas (to
be distinguished as Atmans) taken as a whole are
individualities of a uniform nature of bliss-consciousness and
are unaffected by any change unlike the body-bound souls
(the Kshara). Distinct from these two (Anyah), there is the
Purushottama, the Supreme Person who is above all spirits,
both liberated and unliberated. He pervades the three worlds,
and maintains them all by His will. Krishna declares Himself
to be that Purushottama, distinct and superior both to the Kshara
and Akshara Purushas, a fact proclaimed in all the Vedas and
in other scriptural texts.

In the last or the 18th Chapter it is maintained that Sannyasa
(renunciation) and Tyaga (abandonment) are identical in their
real meaning, though some hold the former to signify the
giving up of all work and the latter only of the fruits of
all action. Sri Krishna gives his decided and final view on
this question that abandonment of fruits alone is valid and
that holy acts like worship, charity, austerity and ordained
duties should never be given up, as they are the means for
the purification of the aspirant' s mind. The text again reverts
to the functioning of the three Gunas of Prakrti on all aspects
of life like knowledge, objects of knowledge, works, agent,
intellect, power of determination, pleasure and character
types. The four Varnas are explained as character types
according to the dominance of one or the other of the three
gunas. This, is followed by the statement that the duties in
life allocated in the scripture to the different character types
are meant for their higher evolution and they have to be
discharged conscientiously as offering to God. By such
discharging of one's duties (Svadharma) as worship of the
Lord, man attains greater spiritual competence. In Ramanuja's
view the long practice of this discipline is the means for
overcoming the evil tendencies born of accumulated Karma
that are standing in the way of the sprouting of devotion.
The meditation process for attaining the Brahman (Atman)
to be followed by one who has attained this state of
purification is next described. Once the Brahman-
consciousness is attained, devotion of the highest order for
the Supreme Person naturally flows from the consciousness
of such a devotee and he comes to realise who He is and
how great He is - and through that supreme devotion, enters
into Him. It is specially stressed that it is not knowledge
but devotion born of it that is the direct cause of Mukti.
Devotion thus is not a handmaid of knowledge as in Advaita.
The position is reversed and devotion becomes the mistress
and knowledge the handmaid.

In the succeeding verses the Gita ascends to the crescendo
of its teaching: "Fix your mind solely in Me. Be My devotee.
Be My worshipper. Prostrate before Me. It is a truth that
you will thereby attain Me - I solemnly promise. Abandoning
all Dharmas, seek Me alone as refuge. I will release you
from all sins. Do not grieve." Ramanuja's interpretation of
this passage is rather ambiguous on the point whether the
teaching contained in it refers to Bhakti or Prapatti.

Bhakti and Prapatti

First of all the distinction between Bhakti and Prapatti has
to be understood. Bhakti means practising love of God, taking
various positive aids in such practice with the idea that if
we take those aids as the means, we can thereby attain Him.
Prapatti means the acceptance of one's utter helplessness to
be redeemed by any means one could adopt, and resigning
oneself to Him and accepting Him both as the means and
the end. In the Vaishnava tradition these two are illustrated
by what are called the Markata-Kisoranyaya and the Marjara-
Kisoranyaya. Markata-Kisora is the young of a monkey. It
holds on tightly to the mother monkey, depending for its
safety and chance of reaching its destination on the strength
of that hold. On the other hand, a Marjara-Kisora or the
young one of a cat (kitten) remains where it is placed and
the mother cat carries it to the destination without any effort
on the young one's part and without any risk on the way.
The kitten has only got to mew. Prapatti means this kind
of absolute resignation to the Lord, making him both the
means and the end.
Besides this psychological distinction, a difference in the
form and requirements of the two disciplines has to be
recognised. Bhakti as described at length in Ramanuja's
Gita-bhashya is open only to those who are eligible for the
Upanishadic way of upasana, preceded by the performance
of ritualistic works prescribed for the twice-born classes, along
with Jnana Yoga, which means meditation on the difference
of the Atman from the body-mind. Only when this Jnana
Yoga is practised will Karma Yoga become really detached
work. Vice versa, Jnana Yoga requires the support of Karma
Yoga, if it is not to lapse into the degraded state of idleness
or even of spiritual fall. Both these disciplines require the
study of the Vedas and the Upanishads, and the eligibility for
this is only for the twice-born classes. And Bhakti is the
end product of the practice of these disciplines, when through
such practice the sins are effaced and the pure
Atman-consciousness dominates. The realisation of Atman
consciousness is the spring from which alone will generate
that continuous flow of the mind towards God, which is
termed as Bhakti. It will be seen from this that the competence
for Bhakti depends on one's competence to Vedic studies,
which is limited to a small section of the people.
Then, is there no way for the vast excluded majority? Yes,
there is. It consists in Prapatti, absolute self-surrender, which
is implied in the analogy of the kitten (Marjara-Kisoranyaya).
It requires no Vedic study, rituals or Upanishadic meditation.
Absolute faith and trust in God is sufficient, as He is made
both the means and the end. It is thus the simpler and the
most direct path.

The Gita has many passages which yield this meaning. As
example may be cited the verse (9.32). "O Partha! Taking
refuge in Me, women, Vaisyas, Sudras and likewise even men
of inferior birth attain to the highest goal." The classes
referred to are not eligible for Vedic upasanas and are
therefore excluded from Bhakti Yoga. Still by taking refuge
in Him, they can attain the highest. What else is this except
Prapatti'?

A still more emphatic assertion is made in one of the
concluding verses ( 18-66) in the following words:
"Completely abandoning all Dharma, seek Me alone as refuge.
I will free you from all sins. Do not grieve."
If these verses are taken together it will be evident that
the Gita does not insist for redemption on Vedic upasana
and ritualism or anything included under the technical
expression 'Dharma'. Absolutely taking refuge in Him alone
is sufficient.
In interpreting these two passages, Ramanuja is very terse
in regard to the first and witholds any elaboration of its
implication. In regard to the second, he maintains that there
may be two interpretations for the idea of abandoning 
Dharma: 
1) Performing all ordained duties and even the
Kamya Karmas without any eye on their fruits and without
any sense of agency in respect of them. Abandoning agency
really means that God is the real actor. the real means (Upaya )
and oneself is only His instrument. He is the adorer and the
adored. Thus He becomes the means and the end. 

2) In the alternative it can mean abandoning dependence on all
expiatary disciplines (Prayascittas like Krchra, Candrayana
etc.) for the removal of sins and relying entirely, on God's
grace for one's redemption.

It is very interesting to speculate on why Ramanuja is so
unclear and even ambiguous on this important doctrine of
Prapatti in his Gita- commentary when there is ample scope
for explicating it in passages like the above as also in his
most monumental work, the Bhashya on the Vedanta Sutras
of Badarayana. On the other hand this doctrine of Prapatti
is the one topic that is vociferously expounded in his
Gadya-trayas, one of which is called Sarana-gati-gadya. It
is said that the answer to this enigmatic stance is to be found
in the audience whom he was addressing in these two sets
of works. In his Bhashyas on the Vedanta Sutras and the Gita
he has in mind the Vedic scholars in whose outlook there
was no place for absolute surrender, a tradition which
Ramanuja inherited from the legacy of the Alvars, the Tamil
saints drowned in God-love, and his precursor Yamunacarya.
The Vedic scholar's outlook is more or less the one
represented in the Markata-KiSora-nyaya. Vedic study and
rituals are very necessary according to the Vedic tradition.
Ramanuja can justify his Visishtadvaita philosophy before
Vedic scholars only if he proves that it is rooted in the Vedas,
which is Karma-oriented according to some, and
Jnana-oriented according to others. To interpret the Gita in
terms of Bhakti preceded by and informed by Jnana will be
in conformity with the Vedic view of life and the Vedic idea
of competency for the performance of the rituals and
meditation inculcated by it. So Ramanuja, who is very
elaborate and over-poweringly eloquent in describing the glory
of Narayana in the Bhashyas, might have thought it more
expedient to be elusive and terse in regard to his special
doctrine of Prapatti which was the treasure that Yamuna
handed over to him as the legacy inherited from the Alvars.
Sometimes to evade a controversy is better than to plunge
into it. Discretion is the better part of valour .

An Estimate

Sli Ramanuja's GIta-bhashya has the following admirable features:
1 ) It is free from needless polemics and it strictly confines
itself to the exposition of the meaning of the verses in the
light of the tradition he represents.

2) He conforms to the ideal of a Bhashya as given in the
following verse of unknown authorship: 
                Sutrartho varnyate yatra vakyais sutranukaribhih ||
                Sva-padani ca varnyante bhashyam bhashya-vido viduh ||
The word Sutra here can be applied also to the verses
of a scriptural Text. It can therefore be interpreted to mean
that a Bhashya should explain the words of a Text in words
and phrases that are in accordance with the purport of the
Text, and should further explain its own words wherever
necessary. Measured by this standard, Ramanuja's
Gita-bhashya will be found to be in conformity with this
dictum.

We have already shown the difference between the
free-lance researcher and a scriptural exegetist who follows
the Bhashya traditions. The former does not accept an overall
purport for a scriptural Text, whereas the latter accepts a
doctrine in the light of which he has to interpret the words
of the Text. Ramanuja does this eminently in the light of
the Visistadvaita doctrine, which, according to him, is the
philosophy of the Vedanta. One who does not accept this
view of Vedanta will not agree with Ramanuja's interpretation,
but to the extent that Ramanuja gets this purport justified
by his interpretation in terms of the words of the Gita Text
itself, an impartial critic has to accept him as a competent
Bhashya writer, even though the critic does not accept his 
philosophy.

This may be contested by some for the reason that
Ramanuja gives the meaning of the word Brahman as Atman
in many places. Those who have made a critical study of
the Gita will hesitate to accept this criticism. It is plain that
the word Brahma or Brahman is used in the text of the Gita
in various places as the Supreme Being Prakrti, the Veda
and the creator Brahma, and in many contexts it denotes
also the Atman, according to Ramanuja. He justifies this in
the light of the meaning of the word 'brh' as boundless. In
interpreting the Verse 12 in Chapter 13 he derives this
meaning from the Gita Text - anadi matparam brahma -
which is interpreted as' Brahman (Atman) having Me, Isvara,
as superior.' Thus he is not arbitrary in giving this meaning.
In the first hexad especially, the word Brahman is mostly used
in this sense. As the word is used in these numerous senses,
we have put it in italics, wherever it does not mean the
Supreme Being, in the whole of the translation of the Text
of the Bhashya. 

3) Those who insist on taking a historical view of all ancient
Texts may find fault with Ramanuja for not having such a
view, but here he stands in line with all the old writers of
Bhashyas. For them the Text they comment on is a revelation
from the Supreme, and as far as the Gita is concerned, Sri
Krishna, who revealed the Gita, is an incarnation of that
Supreme Being. Ramanuja makes this clear in his Introduction
to his Bhashya.

4) His insistence on the compatibility of Jnana and Karma
at all stages of spiritual life makes it impossible for a true
follower of his to become a victim of idleness or indolence
in the name of spirituality. The pragmatic value of this is
undeniable. According to the universally accepted canons of
interpretation, the Upakrama (introduction) and Upasamhara
(conclusion) indicate the trend of thought in the main content
of a scriptural Text. The Gita opens with an exhortation
to rouse Arjuna from his reluctance to do the duty of leading
his army in the guise of a false ideal of quietism. Krishna
wants him to plunge into the midst of action. The Gita ends
with the complete compliance of Arjuna to do so in the words
-' Karishye vacanam tava' (I shall act according to Your word).
Ramanuja's interpretation is in accordance with this norm.

5) He rightly points out that the Gita has characterised
Karma-phala-tyaga (abandonment of the fruits of all actions
as an offering to God) as the basis of all spiritual development
in his comments on verse 12 of Ch.12. For, it is only through
this that the sinful tendencies generated by the Karma of
endless embodiments will be wiped out. Without this cleansing
of the mind, Jnana (knowledge), Abhyasa (remembrance) and
Dhyana (meditation) - the generally accepted spiritual
practices cannot be successfully practised. The
abandonment of the fruits of actions has also got a more
subtle meaning. It involves also the abandonment of the sense
of agency. God thus becomes the means and the end, which is 
Prapatti, which forms the crown of Visistadvaita spiritual 
culture.

6) The doctrine of Visishtadvaita cannot be denied by any
one as a phase of the Vedanta. It is a philosophy of unity
in diversity, one of arriving at the unity that underlies diversity
without sublating the latter. If diversity is sublated it ceases
to be either a unity or a diversity. For, any talk of unity
implies the simultaneous existence of both unity and diversity.
Ramanuja achieves this by the Prakara-Prakari doctrine
combined with the logical theory of Aprthak-siddhi.
Metaphysical genius and logical acumen not inferior to that
of any other Bhashya writer is shown in the development of
these doctrines.

7) The ethical side of the Visishtadvaita philosophy, which
insists on action in all stages of spiritual life, is conveyed
in the theory of the Sesha-Seshi (liege-master) relationship
between God and the Jiva-Jagat (living and non-living entities).
God is the only Master or Seshi and all others are
His Seshas or servants. Their very nature is service of Him,
and to realise this is liberation (Mukti). Ramanuja's ethical
theory is thus in accordance with his logic and metaphysics.

8) The excellence of the language in which his Bhashya is
written deserves special praise. By the 12th century when
Ramanuja lived and wrote, the Sanskrit literary form had
developed from the simple style of Valmiki or even of
Kalidasa into the highly ornate style represented by the later
Kavya and Campu compositions. A characteristic feature of
this style is the tendency to form lengthy periods with
adjectival phrases linked with numerous Samasas and Sandhis.
This feature is conspicuously reflected in Ramanuja's Sanskrit
style which is noted for its melodious sweetness produced
by its elaborate Sandhis and choicest epithets running together
euphoniously to form rolling phrases and sentences that are
music to the ear. The apostle of Bhakti that he is, he uses
his word-magic to thrill the hearts of the hearers. Whenever
he has to describe the Almighty, referred to as Narayana,
or Vasudeva or Krshna, he does not hesitate to unfurl before
us a panchromatic banner of adjectives recalling the ineffable
excellences of the Supreme Person, which generates in us
the feeling of adoration. Consequently it is a common practice
with Sri-Vaishnava scholars to reproduce in their discourses
the cascading sentences of Ramanuja to fascinate their listeners.  
