16.1   श्रीभगवानुवाच अभयं सत्त्वसंशुद्धिर्ज्ञानयोगव्यवस्थितिः । दानं दमश्च यज्ञश्च स्वाध्यायस्तप आर्जवम् ।।    The Lord said: Fearlessness, purity of mind, devotion to meditation on the knowledge(of the self), alms-giving, self-control, worship, study of Vedas, austerity, uprightness: 
 16.2   अहिंसा सत्यमक्रोधस्त्यागः शान्तिरपैशुनम् । दया भूतेष्वलोलुप्त्वं मार्दवं ह्रीरचापलम् ।।    on-injury, truth, freedom from anger, renunciation, tranquility, nonslandering others, compassion to all beings, freedom from desire,gentleness, the sense of shame, freedom from fickleness; 
 16.3   तेजः क्षमा धृतिः शौचमद्रोहो नातिमानिता । भवन्ति सम्पदं दैवीमभिजातस्य भारत ।।    Grandeur, patience, fortitude, purity, freedom from hatred, and from over-pride- these, O Arjuna, belong to him who is born to a divinedestiny. 
 16.4   दम्भो दर्पोऽभिमानश्च क्रोधः पारुष्यमेव च । अज्ञानं चाभिजातस्य पार्थ सम्पदमासुरीम् ।।    Pomposity, arrogance, self-conceit, wrath, rudeness and ignorance- these, O Arjuna, belong to him who is born to a demoniac destiny. 
 16.5   दैवी सम्पद्विमोक्षाय निबन्धायासुरी मता । मा शुचः सम्पदं दैवीमभिजातोऽसि पाण्डव ।।    The divine destiny id deemed to lead the liberation, the demoniac to bondage. Grieve not, O Arjuna, you are born to a divine destiny. 
 16.6   द्वौ भूतसर्गौ लोकेऽस्मिन्दैव आसुर एव च । दैवो विस्तरशः प्रोक्त आसुरं पार्थ मे शृणु ।।    There are two types of beings in this world- the divine and the demoniac. The divine has been described at length. Hear from Me,O Arjuna, about the demoniac. 
 16.7   प्रवृत्तिं च निवृत्तिं च जना न विदुरासुराः । न शौचं नापि चाचारो न सत्यं तेषु विद्यते ।।    The demoniac men know neither action nor renunciation. Cleanliness is not in them, nor even right conduct nor truth. 
 16.8   असत्यमप्रतिष्ठं ते जगदाहुरनीश्वरम् । अपरस्परसम्भूतं किमन्यत्कामहैतुकम् ।।    They maintain: 'The universe is without truth, without any foundation and without a Lord( Isvara). What else can exist without mutualcausation? It has lust for its cause. 
 16.9   एतां दृष्टिमवष्टभ्य नष्टात्मानोऽल्पबुद्धयः । प्रभवन्त्युग्रकर्माणः क्षयाय जगतोऽहिताः ।।    Holding this view, these men of lost souls and feeble understanding do cruel deeds for the destruction of the world. 
 16.10   काममाश्रित्य दुष्पूरं दम्भमानमदान्विताः । मोहाद्गृहीत्वासद्ग्राहान्प्रवर्तन्तेऽशुचिव्रताः ।।    Turning to insatiable desires, seizing through delusion unjustly acquired wealth, and following impious vows, they act, full ofostentation, pride and arrogance. 
 16.11   चिन्तामपरिमेयां च प्रलयान्तामुपाश्रिताः । कामोपभोगपरमा एतावदिति निश्चिताः ।।    Obsessed by unlimited cares which end with dissolution, looking upon enjoyment of desires as their highest aim, and convinced thatthis is all; 
 16.12   आशापाशशतैर्बद्धाः कामक्रोधपरायणाः । ईहन्ते कामभोगार्थमन्यायेनार्थसञ्चयान् ।।    Bound by hundreds of  fetters of hopes, given over to desire and anger, they strive unjustly to gather wealth for the gratificationof their desires. 
 16.13   इदमद्य मया लब्धमिदं प्राप्स्ये मनोरथम् । इदमस्तीदमपि मे भविष्यति पुनर्धनम् ।।    'This I have gained today, and this desire I shall attain. This wealth is mine, and this also shall be mine hereafter. 
 16.14   असौ मया हतः शत्रुर्हनिष्ये चापरानपि । ईश्वरोऽहमहं भोगी सिद्धोऽहं बलवान्सुखी ।।    'This enemy is slain by me; and others also shall slay. I am the Lord, I am the enjoyer, I am successful, I have strength, I have happiness. 
 16.15   आढ्योऽभिजनवानस्मि कोऽन्योऽस्ति सदृशो मया । यक्ष्ये दास्यामि मोदिष्य इत्यज्ञानविमोहिताः ।।    'I am wealthy and high-born; who else is equal to me? I shall sacrifice, I shall give aims, I shall rejoice.' Thus they think,deluded by ignorance. 
 16.16   अनेकचित्तविभ्रान्ता मोहजालसमावृताः । प्रसक्ताः कामभोगेषु पतन्ति नरकेऽशुचौ ।।    Bewildered by many thoughts, ensnared by the net of delusion, addicted to sensual enjoyments, they fall into a foul araka. 
 16.17   आत्मसम्भाविताः स्तब्धा धनमानमदान्विताः । यजन्ते नामयज्ञैस्ते दम्भेनाविधिपूर्वकम् ।।    Self-conceited, self-sufficient, possessed of the intoxication of wealth and pride, they perform sacrifices in name only, withostentation and not according to the injunctions of the Sastras. 
 16.18   अहङ्कारं बलं दर्पं कामं क्रोधं च संश्रिताः । मामात्मपरदेहेषु प्रद्विषन्तोऽभ्यसूयकाः ।।    Depending on their egoism, power and pride, and also of desire and wrath, these malicious men hate Me in their own bodies and inthose of others. 
 16.19   तानहं द्विषतः क्रूरान्संसारेषु नराधमान् । क्षिपाम्यजस्रमशुभानासुरीष्वेव योनिषु ।।    Those haters, cruel, the vilest and the most inauspicious of mankind, I hurl forever into the cycles of births and deaths, into the wombsof demons. 
 16.20   आसुरीं योनिमापन्ना मूढा जन्मनि जन्मनि । मामप्राप्यैव कौन्तेय ततो यान्त्यधमां गतिम् ।।    Fallen into demoniac wombs in birth after birth, these deluded men not attaining Me, further sink down to the lowest level, O Arjuna. 
 16.21   त्रिविधं नरकस्येदं द्वारं नाशनमात्मनः । कामः क्रोधस्तथा लोभस्तस्मादेतत्त्रयं त्यजेत् ।।    Desire, wrath and greed- this is the triple gateway to araka, ruinous to the self. Therefore one should abandon these three. 
 16.22   एतैर्विमुक्तः कौन्तेय तमोद्वारैस्त्रिभिर्नरः । आचरत्यात्मनः श्रेयस्ततो याति परां गतिम् ।।    One who has been released from these threefold gates of darkness, O Arjuna, works for the good of the self. Hence he reaches theSupreme state. 
 16.23   यः शास्त्रविधिमुत्सृज्य वर्तते कामकारतः । न स सिद्धिमवाप्नोति न सुखं न परां गतिम् ।।    He who, abandoning the injunctions of the Sastras, acts under the influence of desire, attains neither perfection nor pleasure,nor the supreme state 
 16.24   तस्माच्छास्त्रम् प्रमाणं ते कार्याकार्यव्यवस्थितौ । ज्ञात्वा शास्त्रविधानोक्तम् कर्म कर्तुमिहार्हसि ।।    Therefore, let the Sastra be your authority for determining what should be done and what should not be done. Knowing what is enjoinedin the injunctions of the Sastra, you should perform work here. 
 16.0   ओंतत्सदिति श्रीमद्भगवद्गीतासु उपनिषत्सु ब्रह्मविद्यायां योगशास्त्रे श्रीकृष्णार्जुनसंवादे दैवासुरसम्पद्विभागयोगो नाम षोडशोऽध्यायः  