 9.1   श्रीभगवानुवाच इदं तु ते गुह्यतमं प्रवक्ष्याम्यनसूयवे । ज्ञानं विज्ञानसहितं यज्ज्ञात्वा मोक्ष्यसेऽशुभात् ।।    The Lord said: I shall declare to you, who does not cavil, this most mysteriousknowledge together with special knowledge, knowing which you would be freed from evil. 
 9.2   राजविद्या राजगुह्यं पवित्रमिदमुत्तमम् । प्रत्यक्षावगमं धर्म्यं सुसुखं कर्तुमव्ययम् ।।    This is the royal science, royal mystery, the supreme purifier, It is realized by direct experience. It is in accord with Dharma, it ispleasant to practice and is abiding. 
 9.3   अश्रद्दधानाः पुरुषा धर्मस्यास्य परन्तप । अप्राप्य मां निवर्तन्ते मृत्युसंसारवर्त्मनि ।।    Men devoid of faith in this Dharma, O scorcher of foes, ever remain without attaining Me, in the mortal pathway of Samsara. 
 9.4   मया ततमिदं सर्वं जगदव्यक्तमूर्तिना । मत्स्थानि सर्वभूतानि न चाहं तेष्ववस्थितः ।।    This entire universe is pervaded by Me, in an unmanifest from. All beings abide in Me, but I do not abide in them. 
 9.5   न च मत्स्थानि भूतानि पश्य मे योगमैश्वरम् । भूतभृन्न च भूतस्थो ममात्मा भूतभावनः ।।    And Yet being do not abide in Me. Behold My Divine Yoga. I am the upholder of all beings and yet I am not in them. My will alonecauses their existence. 
 9.6   यथाकाशस्थितो नित्यं वायुः सर्वत्रगो महान् । तथा सर्वाणि भूतानि मत्स्थानीत्युपधारय ।।    As the powerful element air moving everywhere ever remains in the ether, know that so too all being abide in Me. 
 9.7   सर्वभूतानि कौन्तेय प्रकृतिं यान्ति मामिकाम् । कल्पक्षये पुनस्तानि कल्पादौ विसृजाम्यहम् ।।    All beings, O Arjuna, enter into My Prakrti at the end of a cycle of time. Again I send forth at the beginning of a cycle of time. 
 9.8   प्रकृतिं स्वामवष्टभ्य विसृजामि पुनः पुनः । भूतग्राममिमं कृत्स्नमवशं प्रकृतेर्वशात् ।।    Controlling the Prakrti, which is My own, I send forth again and again this multitude of beings, helpless under the sway of Prakrti. 
 9.9   न च मां तानि कर्माणि निबध्नन्ति धनञ्जय । उदासीनवदासीनमसक्तं तेषु कर्मसु ।।    But these actions do not bind Me, O Arjuna, for I remain detached from them like one unconcerned. 
 9.10   मयाध्यक्षेण प्रकृतिः सूयते सचराचरम् । हेतुनानेन कौन्तेय जगद्विपरिवर्तते ।।    Under My supervision, Prakrti gives birth to all mobile and immobile entities. Because of this, O Arjuna, does the world revolve. 
 9.11   अवजानन्ति मां मूढा मानुषीं तनुमाश्रितम् । परं भावमजानन्तो मम भूतमहेश्वरम् ।।    Fools disregard Me, dwelling in human form, not knowing My higher nature, as the Supreme Lord of all beings. 
 9.12   मोघाशा मोघकर्माणो मोघज्ञाना विचेतसः । राक्षसीमासुरीं चैव प्रकृतिं मोहिनीं श्रिताः ।।    Senseless men entertain a nature which is deluding and akin to that of Raksasas (fiends) and Asuras (monsters). Their hopes are vain, actsare vain and knowledge is vain. 
 9.13   महात्मानस्तु मां पार्थ दैवीं प्रकृतिमाश्रिताः । भजन्त्यनन्यमनसो ज्ञात्वा भूतादिमव्ययम् ।।    But the great-souled ones, O Arjuna, who are associated with My divine nature, worship Me with unwavering mind, knowing Me to be theimmutable source of beings. 
 9.14   सततं कीर्तयन्तो मां यतन्तश्च दृढव्रताः । नमस्यन्तश्च मां भक्त्या नित्ययुक्ता उपासते ।।    aspiring for eternal communion with Me, they worship Me, always singing My praises, striving with steadfast resolution and bowing down to Me indevotion. 
 9.15   ज्ञानयज्ञेन चाप्यन्ये यजन्तो मामुपासते । एकत्वेन पृथक्त्वेन बहुधा विश्वतोमुखम् ।।    Others, too, besides offering the sacrifice of knowledge, worship Me as One, who, characterized by diversity in numberless ways, ismultiformed (in My Cosmic aspect). 
 9.16   अहं क्रतुरहं यज्ञः स्वधाहमहमौषधम् । मन्त्रोऽहमहमेवाज्यमहमग्निरहं हुतम् ।।    I am the Kratu. I am the sacrifice. I am offering to the manes. I am the Mantra. I am Myself the clarified butter. I am the fire. I amthe oblation. 
 9.17   पिताहमस्य जगतो माता धाता पितामहः । वेद्यं पवित्रमोंकार ऋक्साम यजुरेव च ।।    I am the father, mother, creator and grandfather of the universe. I am the purifier. I am the syllable Om and also Rk, Saman and the Yajus. 
 9.18   गतिर्भर्ता प्रभुः साक्षी निवासः शरणं सुहृत् । प्रभवः प्रलयः स्थानं निधानं बीजमव्ययम् ।।    I am the goal, supporter, the lord, the witness, the abode, the refuge and the friend. I am the seat of origin and dissolution, the base forpreservation and imperishable seed. 
 9.19   तपाम्यहमहं वर्षं निगृह्णाम्युत्सृजामि च । अमृतं चैव मृत्युश्च सदसच्चाहमर्जुन ।।    I give heat. I hold back and send forth the rain. I am immortality as well as death, O Arjuna. I am the being, as also the non-being. 
 9.20   त्रैविद्या मां सोमपाः पूतपापाः यज्ञैरिष्ट्वा स्वर्गतिं प्रार्थयन्ते । ते पुण्यमासाद्य सुरेन्द्रलोकम् अश्नन्ति दिव्यान्दिवि देवभोगान् ।।    Those who are versed in the Vedas, being purified from sin by drinking the Soma juice, pray for the passage to heaven and worship Meby sacrifices. Reaching the holy realm of the chief of the gods, they enjoy in heaven celestial pleasure of the gods. 
 9.21   ते तं भुक्त्वा स्वर्गलोकं विशालम् क्षीणे पुण्ये मर्त्यलोकं विशन्ति । एवं त्रयीधर्म्यमनुप्रपन्नाः गतागतं कामकामा लभन्ते ।।    Having enjoyed the spacious world of heaven, they return to the world of mortals when their merit is exhausted. Thus, those who follow theVedic rituals and are drawn by desires, come and go. 
 9.22   अनन्याश्चिन्तयन्तो मां ये जनाः पर्युपासते । तेषां नित्याभियुक्तानां योगक्षेमं वहाम्यहम् ।।    There are those who, excluding all else, think of Me and worship Me aspiring after eternal union with Me. Their prosperity and welfare(Yoga and Kshema) are looked after by Me. 
 9.23   येऽप्यन्यदेवता भक्ता यजन्ते श्रद्धयान्विताः । तेऽपि मामेव कौन्तेय यजन्त्यविधिपूर्वकम् ।।    Even those who are devoted to other divinities with faith in their hearts, worship Me alone, O Arjuna, though not as sanctioned by theSastras. 
 9.24   अहम् हि सर्वयज्ञानाम् भोक्ता च प्रभुरेव च । न तु मामभिजानन्ति तत्त्वेनातश्च्यवन्ति ते ।।    For, I am the only enjoyer and the only Lord of all sacrifices. They do not recognize Me in My nature; hence they fall. 
 9.25   यान्ति देवव्रता देवान्पितॄन् यान्ति पितृव्रताः । भूतानि यान्ति भूतेज्या यान्ति मद्याजिनोऽपि माम् ।।    Devotees of gods go to the gods. The manes-worshippers go to the manes. The worshippers of Bhutas go to the Bhutas. And those whoworship Me come to Me. 
 9.26   पत्रं पुष्पं फलं तोयं यो मे भक्त्या प्रयच्छति । तदहं भक्त्युपहृतमश्नामि प्रयतात्मनः ।।    Whoever offers Me with true devotion a leaf, a flower, a fruit or some water, I accept this offering made with devotion by him who ispure of heart. 
 9.27   यत्करोषि यदश्नासि यज्जुहोषि ददासि यत् । यत्तपस्यसि कौन्तेय तत्कुरुष्व मदर्पणम् ।।    Whatsoever you do, whatsoever you eat, whatsoever you offer, whatsoever you give away, whatsoever austerity you practice, O Arjuna,do that as an offering to Me. 
 9.28   शुभाशुभफलैरेवं मोक्ष्यसे कर्मबन्धनैः । संन्यासयोगयुक्तात्मा विमुक्तो मामुपैष्यसि ।।    Thus equipped in mind with the Yoga of renunciation, you will free yourself from the bonds of Karma, productive of auspicious as well asinauspicious fruits. Thus liberated, you will come to Me. 
 9.29   समोऽहं सर्वभूतेषु न मे द्वेष्योऽस्ति न प्रियः । ये भजन्ति तु मां भक्त्या मयि ते तेषु चाप्यहम् ।।    I am the same to all creation. There is none hateful or dear to Me. But those who worship Me with devotion abide in me and I do abidein them. 
 9.30   अपि चेत्सुदुराचारो भजते मामनन्यभाक् । साधुरेव स मन्तव्यः सम्यग्व्यवसितो हि सः ।।    If even the most sinful man worships Me with undivided devotion, he must be regarded as holy, for he has rightly resolved. 
 9.31   क्षिप्रं भवति धर्मात्मा शश्वच्छान्तिं निगच्छति । कौन्तेय प्रतिजानीहि न मे भक्तः प्रणश्यति ।।    Quickly he becomes righteous and obtain everlasting peace. Affirm on My behalf, O Arjuna, My devotee never perishes. 
 9.32   मां हि पार्थ व्यपाश्रित्य येऽपि स्युः पापयोनयः । स्त्रियो वैश्यास्तथा शूद्रास्तेऽपि यान्ति परां गतिम् ।।    By taking refuge in Me even men of evil birth, women, Vaisyas and also Sudras attain the supreme state. 
 9.33   किं पुनर्ब्राह्मणाः पुण्या भक्ता राजर्षयस्तथा । अनित्यमसुखं लोकमिमं प्राप्य भजस्व माम् ।।    How much more then Brahmanas and royal sages who are pure and are My devotees! Having obtained this transient, joyless world, worship Me. 
 9.34   मन्मना भव मद्भक्तो मद्याजी मां नमस्कुरु । मामेवैष्यसि युक्त्वैवमात्मानं मत्परायणः ।।    Focus your mind on Me, be My devotee, be my worshipper. Bow down to Me Engaging your mind in this manner and regarding Me as the Supreme goal,you will come to Me. 
 9.0   ओंतत्सदिति श्रीमद्भगवद्गीतासु उपनिषत्सु ब्रह्मविद्यायां योगशास्त्रे श्रीकृष्णार्जुनसंवादे राजविद्याराजगुह्ययोगो नाम नवमोऽध्यायः     
