478 पञ्चदशोऽध्यायःक्षेत्राध्याये क्षेत्रक्षेत्रज्ञभूतयोः प्रकृतिपुरुषयोः स्वरूपं विशोध्य विशुद्धस्य अपरिच्छिन्न-ज्ञानैकाकारस्य एव पुरुषस्य प्राकृतगुणसङ्गप्रवाहनिमित्तो देवाद्याकारपरिणतप्रकृतिसंबन्धः अनादिः इत्युक्तम् । अनन्तरे च अध्याये पुरुषस्य कार्यकारणोभयावस्थप्रकृतिसंबन्धो गुणसङ्गमूलो भगवता एव कृतः, इति उक्त्वा गुणसङ्गप्रकारं सविस्तरं प्रतिपाद्य गुणसङ्गनिवृत्तिपूर्वकात्मयाथात्म्यावाप्तिः च भगवद्भक्तिमूला इति उक्तम् । इदानीं भजनीयस्य भगवतः क्षराक्षरात्मकबद्धमुक्तविभूतियुक्तस्य विभूतिभूतात् क्षराक्षरपुरुषद्वयात् निखिलहेयप्रत्यनीककल्याणैकतानतया अत्यन्तोत्कर्षरूपेण विसजातीयस्य पुरुषोत्तमत्वं च वक्तुम् आरभते । तत्र तावद् असङ्गरूपशस्त्रच्छिन्नबन्धाम् अक्षराख्यविभूतिं च वक्तुं छेद्यरूपं बन्धाकारेण विततम् अचित्परिणामविशेषम् अश्वत्थवृक्षाकारं कल्पयन् श्रीभगवानुवाच - श्रीभगवानुवाच यं संसाराख्यम् अश्वत्थम् उर्ध्वमूलम् अधःशाखम् अव्ययं प्राहुः श्रुतयः - 'ऊर्ध्वमूलोऽवाक्शाख एषोऽश्वत्थः सनातनः ।' (क0 उ0 2।3।1) 'ऊर्ध्वमूलमवाक्छाखं । वृक्षं यो वेद संप्रति' (आरण्य0 1।11।5) इत्याद्याः । सप्तलोकोपरि निविष्टचतुर्मुखादित्वेन तस्य ऊर्ध्वमूलत्वम्, पृथिवीनिवासिसकलनरपशुमृग-पक्षिकृमिकीटपतङ्गस्थावरान्ततया अधःशाखत्वम्, असङ्हेतुभूताद् आसम्यग् ज्ञानोदयात् प्रवाहरूपेण अच्छेद्यत्वेन अव्ययत्वम् । यस्य च अश्वत्थस्य छन्दांसि पर्णानि आहुः, छन्दांसि श्रुतयः । 'वायव्यं श्वेतमालभेत भूतिकामः' (यजुः 2।1।1) 'ऐन्द्राग्नमेकादशकपालं निर्वपेत् प्रजाकामः' (यजुः का0 2।1) इत्यादिश्रुतिप्रतिपादितैः काम्यकर्मभिः विवर्धते अयं संसारवृक्षः, इति छन्दांसि एव अस्य पर्णानि, पत्रैः हि वृक्षो वर्धते । यः तम् एवंभूतम् अश्वत्थं वेद स वेदवित्, वेदो हि संसारवृक्षस्य छेदोपायं वदति, छेद्यस्य वृक्षस्य स्वरूपज्ञानं छेदनोपायज्ञानोपयोगि इति वेदविद् इति उच्यते । 1 । THE MYSTERY OF THE ALL-PERVADING PERSONIn the chapter 11 dealing with the Kshetra (Field) and Kshetrajna (Field-knower), It was shown after an examination of the nature of Prakrti and the self, that the beginningless conjunction of the pure self consisting only of infinite knowledge, with the Prakrti transformed into the forms of gods etc., causes the flow of attachment to the Gunas of the Prakrti. In the next chapter (14) the following points were treated: (1) The conjunction of the self with the Prakrti in its two states of effect and cause has attachment to the Gunas for its source and it is determined by the Lord Himself; (2) The manner of attachment to the Gunas has been stated in detail; (3) The attainment of the true nature of the self preceded by the annihilation of attachment to the Gunas has devotion to the Lord as its means. All these have been discussed.Now (in the 15th chapter), Sri Krshna begins to speak of the adorable Lord as having absolute control of the universe consisting of perishable (Kshara) or bound selves and the imperishable (Akshara) or freed selves.He also states that the Lord is the Supreme Person because of his supreme greatness in being antagonistic to all that is evil and in beingendowed with auspicious attributes which are different in kind from boththe perishable and imperishable selves and which constitute His glory. Then to elucidate the manifestation called Akshara (or freed souls) whose bondage has been cut off by the sword of non-attachment, the Lord describes the modification of kshara or non-intelligent Prakrti into the form of bondage that has to be cut off. This modification of bondage - creating Prakrti is compared to the Asvattha (Pipal tree or ficus religious) in the verses that follow.The Vedas speak of the imperishable 'Asvattha tree' called Samsara, which has its 'roots above and branches below', in such passages as the following: This Asvattha tree with its roots above and branches below Is eternal' (Ka.U.6.1), and 'He who knows the tree with its roots above and branches below' (Tai.A., 1.11.5). It has its roots above since it has Its roots in Brahma (the Creator otherwise known as Hiranyagarbha) who is seated above the seven worlds. It has 'branches below' ending with denizens like men, animals, beasts, worms, insects, birds and immovables. It is 'immutable' since it cannot be felled, being of the formof a continual flow. It can be felled only at the dawn of perfect knowledge which causes detachment. They say that the leaves of this Asavattha tree constitute the Vedas. 'The Vedas are said to be the leaves since this tree of Samsara, increases by actions prompted by worldly desires as taught in certain Srutis as, 'He who desires prosperity should sacrifice a white animal to Vayu' (Taitt.Sam.2.1. I) and 'The desirer of offspring shall offer to Indra and Agni a sacrifice with eleven cups of rice-cakes (Ibld.2.2.1). Indeed the tree flourishes with the help of leaves. He who knows the Asvattha of such a nature 'knows the Vedas'. The Vedas also set forth the means of felling this tree of Samsara. He who understands this is called the knower of the Vedas, since knowledge of the nature of the tree to be cut off is helpful to the knowledge concerningthe means of felling the tree.  
479 तस्य मनुष्यादिशाखस्य वृक्षस्य तत्तत्कर्मकृता अपराः च अधः शाखाः पुनरपि मनुष्यपश्वादि-रूपेण प्रसृताः भवन्ति, ऊर्ध्वं च गन्धर्वयक्षदेवादिरूपेण प्रसृता भवन्ति । ताः च गुणप्रवृद्धाः, गुणैः सत्त्वादिभिः प्रवृद्धाः, विषयप्रवालाः शब्दादिविषयपल्लवाः । कथम्? इति अत्र आह - अधश्च मूलान्यनुसंततानि कर्मानुबन्धीनि मनुष्यलोके । ब्रह्मलोकमूलस्य अस्य वृक्षस्य मनुष्याग्रस्य अधः मनुष्यलोके मूलानि अनुसंततानि तानि च कर्मानुबन्धीनि । कर्माणि एव अनुबन्धीनि मूलानि अधो मनुष्यलोके च भवति इत्यर्थः । मनुष्यत्वावस्थायां कृतैः हि कर्मभिः अधो मनुष्यपश्वादयः उर्ध्वं च देवादयो भवन्ति । 2 । This tree spreads downward with men etc., who are the products of their Karma, as branches. It again spreads above into Gandharvas, Yakshas, gods, etc. They are nourished by the Gunas of Sattva etc. They have tendershoots augmented by sense-objects. How does this happen? Sri Krshna explains:The 'secondary roots' of this tree having the main roots in the world of Brahma and its crest in men ramify below in the world of men. They bind them according to their Karma. The meaning is that the effects of acts causing bondage become roots in the world of men. For, the effect of actions done in the human state brings about the further condition of men, beasts etc., down below, and of divinities etc., up above.  
480 अस्य वृक्षस्य चतुर्मुखादित्वेन ऊर्ध्वमूलत्वं तत्संतानपरम्परया मनुष्याग्रत्वेन अधःशाखत्वं मनुष्यत्वे कृतैः कर्मभिः मूलभूतैः पुनः अपि अधः च ऊर्ध्वं च प्रसृतशाखत्वम् इति यथा इदं रूपं निर्दिष्टं न तथा संसारिभिः उपलभ्यते । 'मनुष्यः अहं देवदत्तस्य पुत्रो यज्ञदत्तस्य पिता तदनुरूपपरिग्रहः च' इति एतावन्मात्रम् उपलभ्यते । तथा अस्य वृक्षस्य अन्तो विनाशः अपि गुणमयभोगेषु असङ्गकृतः इति न उपलभ्यते तथा अस्य गुणसङ्ग एव आदिः इति न उपलभ्यते । तस्य प्रतिष्ठा च अनात्मनि आत्माभिमानरूपम् अज्ञानम् इति न उपलभ्यते । प्रतितिष्ठति अस्मिन् एव इति हि अज्ञानम् एव अस्य प्रतिष्ठा । एनम् उक्तप्रकारं सुविरूढमूलं सुष्ठु विविधं रूढमूलम् अश्वत्थं सम्यग्ज्ञानमूलेन दृढेन गुणमयभोगासङ्गाख्येन शस्त्रेण छित्वा ततः विषयासङ्गाद् हेतोः तत् पदं परिमार्गितव्यम् अन्वेषणीयम् यस्मिन् गता भूयः न निवर्तन्ते । कथम् अनादिकालप्रवृत्तो गुणमयभोगसङ्गः तन्मूलं च विपरीतज्ञानं निवर्तते इति अत्र आह - अज्ञानादिनिवृत्तये तम् एव च आद्यं कृत्स्नस्य आदिभूतम् । 'मयाध्यक्षेण प्रकृतिः सूयते सचराचरम् ।' (9।10) 'अहं सर्वस्य प्रभवो मत्तः सर्वं प्रवर्तते ।।' (10।8) 'मत्तः परतरं नान्यत्किंचिदस्ति धनंजय ।' (7।7) इत्यादिषु उक्तम् आद्यं पुरुषम् एव शरणं प्रपद्ये तम् एव शरणं प्रपद्येत । यतः यस्मात् कृत्स्नस्य स्रष्टुः इयं गुणमयभोगसङ्गप्रवृत्तिः पुराणी पुरातनी प्रसृता । उक्तं हि मया एव पूर्वम् एतत् - 'दैवी ह्येषा गुणमयी मम माया दुरत्यया । मामेव ये प्रपद्यन्ते मायामेतां तरन्ति ते ।' (7।14) इति । 'प्रपद्य इयतः प्रवृत्तिः' इति वा पाठः । तम् एव च आद्यं पुरुषं प्रपद्य शरणमुपगम्य इयतः अज्ञाननिवृत्त्यादेः कृत्स्नस्य एतस्य साधनभूता प्रवृत्तिः पुराणी पुरातनी प्रसृता । पुरातनानांमुमुक्षूणां प्रवृत्तिः पुराणी, पुरातना हि मुमुक्षवो माम् एव शरणम् उपगम्य निर्मुक्तबन्धाः संजाता इत्यर्थः । 3-4 । The form of this tree, having its origin above, i.e., in the four-faced Brahma and branches below in the sense that man forms the crest through continual lineage therefrom, and also having its branches extended above and below by actions done in the human state and forming secondary roots - that form of the tree is not understood by people immersed in Samsara. Only this much is perceived: 'I am a man, the son of Devadatta, the father of Yajnadatta; I have property appropriate to these conditions'. Likewise, it is not understood that its destruction can be brought about by detachment from enjoyments which are based on Gunas. Similarly it is not perceived that attachment to the Guna alone is the beginning of this (tree). Again, it is not perceived that the basis of this tree is founded on ignorance which is the misconception of self as non-self. Ignorance alone is the basis of this tree, since in it alone the tree is fixed.This Asvattha, described above, firm-rooted, i.e., the roots of which are firm and manifold, is to be cut off by the strong axe of detachment, namely, detachment from the sense objects composed of the three Gunas. This can be forged through perfect knowledge. As one gains detachment from sense-objects, one should seek and find out the goal from which nobody ever returns. How does this attachment to sense-objects, which consists of the Gunas and erroneous knowledge forming its cause, cease to exist?Sri Krshna now answers:One should seek 'refuge (Prapadyet) in the Primal Person' alone in order to overcome this ignorance. One should seek refuge (Prapadyeta) in Himwho is primal, namely, the beginning of all entities, as stated in the following text : 'With Me as the Lord, the Prakrti gives birth to all thatwhich moves, and that which does not move' (9.10), 'I am the origin of all; from Me proceed everything' (10.8), and 'There is nothing higher than Me, O Arjuna' (7.7). From Me, the creator of everything, has streamed forth this ancient activity, continuing from time immemorial, of attachment to sense-objects consisting of Gunas. This has beendeclared already by Me: 'For this divine Maya of Mine consisting of the Gunas is hard to break through. But those who take refuge in Me alone shall pass beyond this Maya' (7.14).Or a variant of this stanza is 'prapadya iyatah pravrttih' (in place of 'prapadyet yatah pravrittih'). This gives the sense that this discipline of taking refuge in the Supreme Person for dispelling of ignorance has continued from a distant past. The tendencies of ancient persons seeking liberation are also ancient. The purport is this: The ancient liberation-seekers, taking refuge in Me alone, were released from bondage. [This can be taken to mean that Prapatti or taking refuge in the Lord had originated in the Bhakti tradition of the Sri Vaishnavites from ancient sages i.e., from the Alvars who preceded Ramanuja by several centuries.It is not a creation of Ramanuja].  
481 एवं मां शरणम् उपगम्य निर्मानमोहाः - निर्गतानात्मात्माभिमानरूपमोहाः, जितसङ्गदोषाः - जितगुणमयभोगसङ्गाख्यदोषाः, अध्यात्मनित्याः - आत्मनि यद् ज्ञानं तद् अध्यात्मम् आत्मध्याननिरताः, विनिवृत्ततदितरकामाः सुखदुःखसंज्ञैः द्वन्द्वैः च विमुक्ता अमूढाः आत्मानात्मस्वभावज्ञाः तत् अव्ययं पदं गच्छन्ति अनवच्छिन्नज्ञानाकारम् आत्मानं यथावस्थितं प्राप्नुवन्ति । मां शरणम् उपागतानां मत्प्रसादाद् एव ताः सर्वाः प्रवृत्तयः सुशक्याः सिद्धिपर्यन्ता भवन्ति इत्यर्थः । 5 । Thus, when they have taken refuge in Me, become free from 'perverse notions concerning the self" namely, become free from the delusion in the form of misconceiving the non-self (body) as the self; 'victorious over the evil of attachment', namely, victorious over the evil known asattachment to sense-objects consisting of the Gunas; 'ever devoted to self,namely completely absorbed in the knowledge of the self which is calledAdhyatma or knowledge about the self; when they have, 'turned away from desires' other than this self-knowledge; when they are liberated from 'dualities called pleasure and pain' such undeluded souls', namely, those who are able to discern the natures of self and non-self, attain to that 'imperishable status'. They attain the self as It is, in the form of infinite knowledge.Consequently for those who seek refuge in Me, all actions become easy of performance till perfection is attained by My grace.  
482 तद् आत्मज्योतिः न सूर्यो भासयते न शशाङ्को न पावकः च । ज्ञानम् एव हि सर्वस्य प्रकाशकम् । बाह्यानि तु ज्योतींषि विषयेन्द्रियसंबन्धविरोधितमोनिरसनद्वारेण उपकारकाणि । अस्य च प्रकाशको योगः, तद्विरोधि च अनादिकर्म, तद्विरोधि च अनादिकर्म, तन्निवर्तनं च उक्तं भगवत्प्रपत्तिमूलम् असङ्गादि । यद् गत्वा पुनः न निवर्तन्ते तत् परमं धाम परमं ज्योतिः मम मदीयं मद्विभूतिभूतो ममांश इत्यर्थः । आदित्यादीनाम् अपि प्रकाशकत्वेन तस्य परमत्वम् । आदित्यादीनि हि ज्योतींषि न ज्ञानज्योतिषः प्रकाशकानि, ज्ञानम् एव हि सर्वस्य प्रकाशकम् । 6 । The sun cannot illumine the light of the self, nor moon, nor fire. For, knowledge is indeed that which illumines them all. External lights, however, are helpful only in removing the darkness which hinders the contact between the senses and the objects. It is the intelligence of the self that reveals such exeternal lights. What reveals this (i.e., the self) is Yoga (i.e., meditation) only. Beginningless Karma is the hindrance. It has been taught that the way for the erasing of Karma is self-surrender to the Lord through detachment etc. That supreme light, reaching which they do not return any more is the self, which is My glory (Vibhuti) and therefore belongs to Me and is a part of Myself. Such is the meaning. The supremacy of this light (i.e., individual self) consists in its capacity to illumine even the sun and other bodies. The sun etc., cannot illumine the light of knowledge. Knowledge alone can illuminate all things (including the light of the sun which sheds only physical light on objects).  
483 इत्थम् उक्तस्वरूपः सनातनो मम अंश एव सन् कश्चिद् अनादिकर्मरूपाविद्यावेष्टनतिरोहित-स्वरूपो जीवभूतो जीवलोके वर्तमानो देवमनुष्यादिप्रकृतिपरिणामविशेषशरीरस्थानि मनःषष्ठानि इन्द्रियाणि कर्षति । कश्चित् च पूर्वोक्तमार्गेण अस्या अविद्याया मुक्तः स्वेन रूपेण अवतिष्ठते ।जीवभूतः तु अतिसंकुचितज्ञानैश्वर्यः कर्मलब्धप्रकृतिपरिणामविशेषरूपशरीरस्थानाम् इन्द्रियाणां मनःषष्ठानाम् ईश्वरः तानि कर्मानुगुणम् इतः ततः कर्षति । 7 । That self, whose nature has been described thus, though constituting an everlasting part of Myself, becomes the bound individual self in the world of life. Covered by ignorance in the form of beginningless Karma, It attracts to Itself the five senses and the mind, which are located in thebodies of gods, men etc., and which are particular transformations of Prakrti. Some parts of Myself (i.e., the selves), becoming free from ignorance (Avidya) in the aforesaid manner, remain in their own intrinsicnature. But the bound individual self is very much contracted in power and knowledge. The individual self is the lord of the senses and the mindin bodies, and forms a bound individual in combination with a particulartransformation of the Prakrti through Karma. Thus Karma attracts the selves hither and thither according to its nature.  
484 यत् शरीरम् अवाप्नोति, यस्मात् शरीराद् उत्क्रामति, तत्र अयम् इन्द्रियाणाम् ईश्वरः एतानि इन्द्रियाणि भूतसूक्ष्मैः सह गृहीत्वा संयाति । वायुः गन्धान् इव आशयात् - यथा वायुः स्रक्चन्दनकस्तूरिकाद्याशयात् तत्स्थानात् सूक्ष्मावयवैः सह गन्धान् गृहीत्वा अन्यत्र संयाति तद्वद् इत्यर्थः । 8 । Whatever body It acquires, and from whatever body It departs, the lord of the semes, i.e., the self, goes on Its way taking with It the senses with the subtle elements, just like the wind carrying scents from place to place. Just as the wind takes away scents with subtle parts from flower-garlands, sandal, musk and the rest from their places and moves elsewhere - so does the self.  
485 कानि पुनः तानि इन्द्रियाणि? इत्याह -एतानि मनःषष्ठानि इन्द्रियाणि अधिष्ठाय स्वस्वविषयवृत्त्यनुगुणानि कृत्वा तान् शब्दादीन् विषयान् उपसेवते उपभुंक्ते । 9 । What are these senses? Sri Krshna explains:Presiding over these sense-organs, of which the mind is the sixth, the lord of the body drives the organs towards their corresponding objects like sound and the rest and enjoys them.  
486 एवं गुणान्वितं सत्त्वादिगुणमयप्रकृतिपरिणामविशेषमनुष्यत्वादि संस्थानपिण्डसंसृष्टं पिण्डविशेषाद् उत्क्रामन्तं पिण्डविशेषे अवस्थितं वा गुणमयान् विषयान् भुञ्जानं वा कदाचिद् अपि प्रकृतिपरिणामविशेषमनुष्यत्वादिपिण्डाद् विलक्षणं ज्ञानैकाकारं विमूढा न अनुपश्यन्ति । विमूढाः मनुष्यत्वादिपिण्डात्माभिमानिनः । ज्ञानचक्षुषः तु पिण्डात्मविवेकविषयज्ञानवन्तः सर्वावस्थम् अपि एनं विविक्ताकारम् एव पश्यन्ति । 10 । The deluded do not perceive the Atman (self) as a form of knowledge separate from Its human and other configurations which are particular transformations of Prakrti, with which the self is conjoined when It is in embodied condition, experiencing the objects of the senses. The self also departs from that body when the body dies and assumes another body. The deluded or those who misconceive the body as the self do not understand all this. However, those who possess the eye of knowledge, i.e, have the knowledge concerning the difference between the body and the self, perceive the self as having a form different from the body in all conditions.  
487 मत्प्रपत्तिपूर्वकं कर्मयोगादिषु यतमानाः तैः निर्मलान्तःकरणाः योगिनः योगाख्येन चक्षुषा आत्मनि शरीरे अवस्थितम् अपि शरीराद् विविक्तं स्वेन रूपेण अवस्थितम् एनं पश्यन्ति । यतमानाःअपि अकृतात्मानः मत्प्रपत्तिविरहिणः तत एव असंस्कृतमनसः तत एव अचेतसःआत्मावलोकनसमर्थचेतोरहिताः न एनं पश्यन्ति । 11 । The 'striving Yogins' i.e., those striving in the path of Karma Yoga etc., after practising Prapatti (self-surrender), purify their inner organs of perception and perceive the self as established in Its own form as distinctfrom the body, with the eye of Yoga, But those of 'unrefined minds',namely those who do not practise Prapatti to Me, and are therefore of 'uncultivated minds, and devoid of intelligence' find themselves incapableof perceiving the self. They do not perceive It in distinction from the body.  
488 एवं रविचन्द्राग्नीनाम् इन्द्रियसन्निकर्षविरोधिसंतमसनिरसनमुखेन इन्द्रियानुग्राहकतया प्रकाशकानांज्योतिष्मताम् अपि प्रकाशकं ज्ञानज्योतिः आत्मा मुक्तावस्थो जीवावस्थः च भगवद्विभूतिः इति उक्तम् 'तद्धाम परमं मम ।' (15।6) 'ममैवांशो जीवलोके जीवभूतः सनातनः ।।' (15।7) इति । इदानीम् अचित्परिणामविशेषभूतम् आदित्यादीनां ज्योतिष्मतां ज्योतिः अपि भगवद्विभूतिः इत्याह -अखिलस्य जगतो भासकम् एतेषाम् आदित्यादीनां यत्तेजः तत् मदीयं तेजः तैः तैः आराधितेन मया तेभ्यो दत्तम् इति विद्धि । 12 । Thus, it has been said that the self, whether released or not, is a manifestation of the glory (Vibhuti) of the Lord, Its light of knowledge illuminates even the luminaries such as the sun, moon and fire which help the senses to see by removing the darkness that prevents the contact of the senses with their objects as described (in the verses): 'That supreme light.. is Mine' (15.6) and 'An everlasting part of Myself having become the (bound) self in the world of life' (15.7). Now, He declares that even the lights of the sun and other luminaries, which form particular developments of Prakrti, are Vibhutis of the Lord:That brilliance of the sun and other luminaries which illumines the whole universe that brilliance belongs to Me. Know that this capacity of illumining is granted to them by Me who have been worshipped severally by them.  
489 पृथिव्याः च भूतधारिण्या धारकत्वशक्तिः मदीया इत्याह -अहं पृथिवीम् आविश्य सर्वाणि भूतानि ओजसा मम अप्रतिहतसामर्थ्येन धारयामि । तथा अहम् अमृतरसमयः सोमो भूत्वा सर्वौषधीः पुष्णामि । 13 । Sri Krshna states that the power in the earth to support all those that reside on it belongs to Him alone:Entering the earth I uphold all beings by My strength, namely, by My irresistible power. Likewise, becoming the Soma consisting of the juice of the nectar, I nourish all herbs.  
490 अहं वैश्वानरो जाठरानलो भूत्वा सर्वेषां प्राणिनां देहम् आश्रितः तैः भुक्तं खाद्यचोष्यलेह्यपेयात्मकं चतुर्विधम् अन्नं प्राणापानवृत्तिभेदसमायुक्तः पचामि । 14 । Becoming the 'digestive fire', or the fire of digestion, I function within the bodies of all living creatures. In union with various activities of 'inward and outward breaths', I digest the 'four kinds of food' eaten by individuals. These consist of foods to be chewed, sucked, licked and drunk.  
491 अत्र परमपुरुषविभूतिभूतौ सोमवैश्वानरौ अहं सोमो भूत्वा वैश्वानरो भूत्वा इति तत्सामानाधिकरण्येन निर्दिष्टौ । तयोः च सर्वस्य भूतजातस्य च परमपुरुषसामानाधिकरण्यनिर्देशे हेतुम् आह -तयोः सोमवैश्वानरयोः सर्वस्य भूतजातस्य च सकलप्रवृत्तिनिवृत्तिमूलज्ञानोदयदेशे हृदि सर्वं मत्संकल्पेन नियच्छन् अहम् आत्मतया सन्निविष्टः । तथा आहुः श्रुतयः - 'अन्तः प्रविष्टः शास्ता जनानां सर्वात्मा' (तै0 आ0 3।11) 'यः पृथिव्यां तिष्ठन्' (बृ0 उ0 3।7।3) 'य आत्मनि तिष्ठन्नात्मनोऽन्तरो यमयति ।' (बृ0 उ0 3।7।22) 'पद्मकोशप्रतीकाशं हृदयं चाप्यधोमुखम् ।' (तै0 ना0 11) 'अथ यदिदमस्मिन् ब्रह्मपुरे दहरं पुण्डरीकं वेश्म' (छा0 उ0 8।1।1) इत्याद्याः । स्मृतयः च 'शास्ता विष्णुरशेषस्य जगतो यो जगन्मयः ।' (वि0 पु0 1।17।20) 'प्रशासितारं सर्वेषामणीयांसमणीयसाम् ।' (मनु0 12।122) 'यमो वैवस्वतो राजा यस्तवैष हृदि स्थितः ।'  (मनु0 8।92) इत्याद्याः । अतो मत्तः एव सर्वेषां स्मृतिः जायते, स्मृतिः पूर्वानुभूतविषयम् अनुभवसंस्कारमात्रजं ज्ञानम् । ज्ञानम् इन्द्रियलिङ्गागमयोगजो वस्तुनिश्चयः, सः अपि मत्तः । अपोहनं च, अपोहनं ज्ञाननिवृत्तिः । अपोहनम् ऊहनं वा ऊहनं ऊहः, ऊहो नाम - इदं प्रमाणम् इत्थं प्रवर्तितुम् अर्हति इति प्रमाणप्रवृत्त्यर्हताविषयं सामग्र्यादिनिरूपणजन्यं प्रमाणानुग्राहकं ज्ञानम्, ऊहो नाम वितर्कः, स च मत्त एव । वेदैः च सर्वैः अहम् एव वेद्यः । अतः अग्निवायुसूर्यसोमेन्द्रादीनां मदन्तर्यामिकत्वेन मदात्मकत्वात् तत्प्रतिपादनपरैः अपि सर्वैः वेदैः अहम् एव वेद्यः, देवमनुष्यादिशब्दैः जीवात्मा इव । वेदान्तकृत् वेदानाम् 'इन्द्रं यजेत' (शत0 ब्रा0 5।1।6) 'वरुणं यजेत' (शत0 ब्रा0 2।3।37) इति एवमादीनाम् अन्तः फलं फले हि ते सर्वे वेदाः पर्यवस्यन्ति, अन्तकृत् फलकृत् वेदोदितफलस्य प्रदाता च अहम् एव इत्यर्थः । तदुक्तं पूर्वम् एव - 'यो यो यां यां तनुं भक्तः श्रद्धयार्चितुमिच्छति ।' (7।21) इत्यारभ्य 'लभते च ततः कामान् मयैव विहितान् हि तान् ।' (7।22) इति; 'अहं हि सर्वयज्ञानां भोक्ता च प्रभुरेव च।' (9।24) इति च । वेदविद् एव च अहम् वेदवित् च अहम् एव, एवं मदभिधायिनं वेदम् अहम् एव वेद । इतः अन्यथा यो वेदार्थं ब्रूते, न स वेदविद् इति अभिप्रायः । 15 । 'The Supreme Person who has the Soma, digestive fire etc., as his glory (Vibhuti) is  here equated with Him by means of co-ordinate predication in the verses 'Becoming the juicy Soma' and 'Becoming the digestive fire'. He now sets forth the reason for equating these glories with Himself.Controlling everything by My will, I exist as 'the self in their hearts', namely, in the place from which springs knowledge, the root of activity and inactivity of all beings as also of the Soma and digestive fire. So the Srutis declare in the following texts: 'Entering within, He is the ruler of all things and the Self of all' (Tai.A.3.11), 'He who, dwelling in the earth, He who, dwelling in the self, is within the self.. .who controls the earth' (Br.U.Madh.3.7.3.22); 'The heart which is comparable to an inverted lotus-bud' (Ma.Na.11.7); and 'Now, here, in the city of brahman, is an abode, a small lotus-flower' (Cha..U.8.1.1). The Smrtis also declare thus:'Vishnu is the ruler of the whole universe, who permeates the universe' (V.P.1.17.20), 'He is the ruler of all, who is minutely small among those who are minutely small' (Manu.12.122); and 'He is the controller, the judge, the King, who is seated in your heart' (Ibid.8.92). Therefore, the memory of all beings springs from Me alone. 'Memory' is knowledge springing from experience and its subtle impressions. Theyhave for their contents past experiences. 'Knowledge' is determination of a thing through the senses, inference, the scriptures and intuitive meditation. This is also from Me. So does 'Apohana' too. 'Apohana' signifies the cessation of knowledge. 'Apohana' may also mean 'Uhana' (conjectural knowledge). Uhana is 'Uha' (conjecture). 'Uha' is that knowledge which is accessory to the actual means of knowledge (Pramana). It is done by determining whether that means of knowledge can be operative with reference to the particular subject-matter on hand, through the examination of the instruments of that means of knowledge (Pramana). This' Uha ' also comes from Me.Indeed 'I am to be known from all the Vedas,' for I am the inner ruler of Agni, Surya, Soma, Vayu, Sun and Indra and other divinities as their self. The Vedas are intent on speaking of them (i.e., the divinities). 'I amto be known from all the, Vedas; for, terms like gods, men etc., signify the individual selves in them. I bring about the fruition of the Veda. 'Vedanta', here means the end, namely, the fruition, of Vedic injunctions like 'Let sacrifice 'be made to Indra' and 'Let sacrifice be made to Varuna.' For, all Vedas find their consummation in fruition. 'Antakrt' means grantor of fruits. The meaning is: 'I alone am the grantor of thefruition described in the Vedas. 'This has been already declared in the verses beginning from, 'Whichever devotee seeks to worship with faith whatever form' and ending with, 'From that faith he gets the objects of his desire, granted in reality by Me alone' (7.21-22); and also 'I am the enjoyer and the only Lord of all sacrifices' (9.24). I am the knower of the Vedas; I know the Veda that speaks about Me. The sense is that he who speaks of the meaning of the Vedas as otherwise than this import, is not the knower of the Vedas.  
492 अतः मत्त एव सर्ववेदानां सारभूतम् अर्थं शृणु -क्षरः च अक्षर एव च इति द्वौ इमौ पुरुषौ लोके प्रथितौ । तत्र क्षरशब्दनिर्दिष्टः पुरुषो जीवशब्दाभिलपनीय ब्रह्मादिस्तम्बपर्यन्तक्षरणस्वभावाचित्संसृष्ट सर्वभूतानि, अत्र अचित्सङ्गरूपैकोपाधिना पुरुषः इति एकत्वनिर्देशः । अक्षरशब्दनिर्दिष्टः कूटस्थः, अचित्संसर्गवियुक्तः, स्वेन रूपेण अवस्थितो मुक्तात्मा । स तु अचित्संसर्गाभावाद् अचित्परिणामविशेषब्रह्मादिदेहसाधारणो न भवति इति कूटस्थ इति उच्यते । अत्र अपि एकत्वनिर्देशः अचिद्वियोगरूपैकोपाधिना अभिहितः । न हि इतः पूर्वम् अनादौ काले मुक्त एक एव । यथा उक्तम् - 'बहवो ज्ञानतपसा पूता मद्भावमागताः ।।' (4।10) 'मम साधर्म्यमागताः । सर्गेऽपि नोपजायन्ते प्रलये न व्यथन्ति च ।।' (14।2) इति । 16 । Therefore, listen from Me alone the meaning or the essence of the Vedas.There are, the Sastras say, 'two kinds of Persons (Purushas)' well known in the world - 'the perishable and the imperishable.' Of the two, the Persons designated by the term 'perishable' (kshara) are beings conjoint with non-conscient matter of modifiable nature, from Brahma down to a blade of grass, who can be signified also by the term Jivas (individual selves). Here the term Purusha (Person) is used in singular to indicate thecommon single condition of being conjoined with non-conscient matter. That which is the 'imperishable' (Akshara) is called 'unchanging'(Kutastha), this is the released self, devoid of association with non-conscient matter, remaining in its own form. It is called 'unchangeable' in as much as when free from non-conscient matter, It has no specific connection with particular transformations of non-conscient matter like the bodies of Brahma etc. Here also the designation of the term in singular (as expressing a generic class) denoting the totality of liberated selves, is used on account of the single condition of dissociation from non-conscient matter. It does not mean that before this, in time without beginning, there existed but a single liberated self. So it is stated: 'Purifiedby the austerity of knowledge, many have attained My state' (4.10); and 'They are not born at the time of creation, nor do they suffer at the time of dissolution' (14.2).  
493 उत्तमः पुरुषः तु ताभ्यां क्षराक्षरशब्दनिर्दिष्टाभ्यां बद्धमुक्तपुरुषाभ्याम् अन्यः अर्थान्तरभूतः परमात्मा इति उदाहृतः । सर्वासु श्रुतिषु परमात्मा इति निर्देशाद् एव हि उत्तमः पुरुषो बद्धमुक्तपुरुषाभ्याम् अर्थान्तरभूतः इति अवगम्यते । कथम्? यो लोकत्रयम् आविश्य बिभर्ति, लोक्यत इति लोकः तत्त्रयं लोकत्रयम्अचेतनं तत्संसृष्टः चेतनो मुक्तः च इति प्रमाणावगम्यम् एतत् त्रयं य आत्मतया आविश्य बिभर्ति,स तस्मात् व्याप्याद् भर्तव्यात् च अर्थान्तरभूतः ।इतः च उक्तात् लोकत्रयाद् अर्थान्तरभूतः । यतः सः अव्यय ईश्वरः च । अव्ययस्वभावो हिव्ययस्वभावाद् अचेतनात् तत्संबन्धेन तदनुसारिणः च चेतनाद् अचित्संबन्धयोग्यतया पूर्वसंबन्धिनः मुक्तात् च अर्थान्तरभूत एव; तथा एतस्य लोकत्रयस्य ईश्वरः ईशितव्यात् तस्माद्अर्थान्तरभूतः । 17 । But there is the 'Supreme Person who is other than the bound and liberated selves' expressed by the terms, the 'perishable' and the 'imperi-shable'. He forms a completely different category. All Srutis call Him the Supreme Self. But by that very designation as the Supreme Self, it may be known that the Supreme Person is a category distinct from the bound and the liberated selves. How? 'Entering the threefold world,' supports it. 'Loka' (world) is that which is perceived. There are three such perceivable worlds, He enters the 'three worlds' which can be understood from the authority of the Srutis. These are the world of unconscient matter, the world of conscient selves conjoined with matter, and the world of liberated selves. As understandable from the Srutis, He enters into these three categories as their Atman and supports them. Thus, He is an entity different from the triad which He pervades and maintains. Further He is different, as He is imperishable and as He is the Lord. Being imperishable, He is different from the bound non-conscient matter whose nature is subject to decay. He is different from the bound conscient selves as the latter is subject to Prakrti and follows its laws. He is also distinguished from the liberated selves, because in their previous condition they were connected with matter andmixed with it. Similarly, He is 'the Lord of these 'three worlds,' a category distinct from those which have to be ruled.  
494 यस्माद् एवम् उक्तैः स्वभावैः क्षरं पुरुषम् अतीतः अहम्, अक्षरात् मुक्ताद् अपि च उत्तमः उक्तैः हेतुभिः उत्कृष्टतमः अतः अहं लोके वेदे च पुरुषोत्तमः इति प्रथितः अस्मि । वेदार्थावलोकनात् लोक इति स्मृतिः इह उच्यते । श्रुतौ स्मृतौ च इत्यर्थः । श्रुतौ तावत् - 'परं ज्योतिरुपसंपद्य स्वेन रूपेणाभिनिष्पद्यते स उत्तमः पुरुषः' (छा0 उ0 8।12।3) इत्यादौ । स्मृतौ अपि 'अंशावतारं पुरुषोत्तमस्य ह्यनादिमध्यान्तमजस्य विष्णोः । (वि0पु 5।17।33) इत्यादौ ।। 18 ।। In as much as I transcend the perishable (i.e., bound) person of the aforesaid nature, and I am higher, for reasons stated earlier, than the imperishable Person or liberated self, therefore I am styled the Supreme Person in the Smrti and Srutis. The Smrti is called Loka by reason of its leading to the meaning of the Vedas. The meaning is that I am famous in the Sruti and in the Smrti. In the Sruti for instance; 'Reaching the Supreme Light, it appears in its own nature. 'He is the Supreme Person' (Cha.u., 8.12.3). In the Smrti we have texts like 'I will approach Him (Sri Krshna), the Supreme Person who is the incarnation of a portion of Vishnu, who is without beginning, middle or end' (V.P.5.17.33).  
495 य़ः एवम् उक्तेन प्रकारेण पुरुषोत्तमं माम् असंमूढो जानाति, क्षराक्षरपुरुषाभ्याम् अव्ययस्वभावतया व्यापनभरणैश्वर्यादियोगेन च विसजातीयं जानाति, स सर्ववित् मत्प्राप्त्युपायता यद् वेदितव्यं तत् सर्वं वेद । भजति मां सर्वभावेन ये च मत्प्राप्त्युपायता मद्भजनप्रकारा निर्दिष्टाः तैः च सर्वैः भजनप्रकारैः मां भजते । सर्वैः मद्विषयैः वेदनैः मम या प्रीतिः या च मम सर्वैः मद्विषयैः भजनैः उभयविधा सा प्रीतिः अनेन वेदनेन मम जायते । 19 । He who, without delusion, knows the Supreme Person as Myself, as already stated, i.e., knows Me, as differing in kind from the perishable and the imperishable Persons, because of My being immutable and because of My being distinguished from them as pervading, supporting and ruling etc., by nature - such a devotee knows all. He knows all that is to be known as the means of attaining Me. He worships Me in 'every way' i.e., whatever ways of worshipping Me have been prescribed as the means of attaining Me, he worships Me by all these modes of worship. Whatever love is evoked in Me towards one approaching Me by all forms of knowledge having Me for their object, and whatever love is roused up in Me towards those who practise various modes of worship having Me for their object - all that in a unified form is generated in Me towards one who has the knowledge of Me as described.  
496 इति एतत् पुरुषोत्तमत्ववेदनं पूजयति -इत्थं मम पुरुषोत्तमत्वप्रतिपादनं सर्वेषां गुह्यानां गुह्यतमम् इदं शास्त्रं त्वम् अनघतया योग्यतम इति कृत्वा मया तव उक्तम् । एतद् बुद्ध्वा बुद्धिमान् स्यात् कृतकृत्यः च मां प्रेप्सुना उपादेया या बुद्धिः सा सर्वा उपात्ता स्यात् । यत् च तेन कर्तव्यम्, तत् च सर्वं कृतं स्याद् इत्यर्थः । अनेन श्लोकेन अनन्तरोक्तं पुरुषोत्तमविषयं ज्ञानं शास्त्रजन्यम् एव एतत् सर्वं करोति, न तु साक्षात्काररूपम् इति उच्यते । 20 । Now, Sri Krshna eulogises this knowledge of the Supreme Person:Thus, this Sastra, the most mysterious of all mysteries and which teaches My aspect as the Supreme Person, has been imparted to you by Me, as you are worthy to receive it because you are sinless. By understanding this, a man will become truly wise and will have fulfilled his duty. Whatever wisdom has to be cultivated for attaining Me, all that should be taken as cultivated and that whatever duty has to be fulfilled in that connection - all that is to be taken as fulfilled by knowing this (the Purushottama Vidya). He gets all spiritual fulfilment by this knowledge, except the direct vision of Purusottama. [Probably the idea is that direct vision comes only when the body falls at the end of the quantum of Karma that has brought it into existence. Before thatonly the state of the Sthitaprajna can be attained. The thin veil of residual Karma still stands in the way].  
