224 प्रथमेन अध्यायषट्केन परमप्राप्यभूतस्य, परस्य ब्रह्मणो निरवद्यस्य निखिलजगदेककारणस्य सर्वज्ञस्य सर्वभूतस्य सत्यसंकल्पस्य महाविभूतेः श्रीमतो नारायणस्य प्राप्त्युपायभूतं तदुपासनं वक्तुं तदङ्गभूतम् आत्मज्ञानपूर्वककर्मानुष्ठानसाध्यं प्राप्तुः प्रत्यगात्मनो याथात्म्यदर्शनम् उक्तम् ।इदानीं मध्यमेन षट्केन परब्रह्मभूतपरमपुरुषस्वरूपं तदुपासनं च भक्तिशब्दवाच्यम् उच्यते । तदेतद् उत्तरत्र 'यतः प्रवृत्तिर्भूतानां येन सर्वमिदं ततम् । स्वकर्मणा तमभ्यर्च्य सिद्धिं विन्दति मानवः ।।' (18।46) इत्यारभ्य 'विमुच्य निर्ममः शान्तो ब्रह्मभूयाय कल्पते । ब्रह्मभूतः प्रसन्नात्मा न शोचति न काङ्क्षति ।। समः सर्वेषु भूतेषु मद्भक्तिं लभते पराम् ।।' (18।53, 54) इति वक्ष्यते।उपासनं  तु भक्तिरूपापन्नम् एव परमप्राप्त्युपायभूतम् इति वेदान्तवाक्यसिद्धम् 'तमेव विदित्वा-तिमृत्युमेति' (श्वे0 उ0 3।8) 'तमेवं विद्वानमृत इह भवति' (नृ0 पू0 ता0 10।6) इत्यादिना अभिहितं वेदनम् 'आत्मा वा अरे द्रष्टव्यः श्रोतव्यो मन्तव्यो निदिध्यासितव्यः' (बृ0 उ0 2।4।5) 'आत्मानमेव लोकमुपासीत' (बृ0 उ0 1।4।15) 'सत्त्वशुद्धौ ध्रुवा स्मृतिः, स्मृतिलम्भे सर्वग्रन्थीनां विप्रमोक्षः' (छा0 उ0 7।26।2) 'भिद्यते हृदयग्रन्थिः' (मु0 उ0 2।2।8) इत्यादिभिः ऐकार्थ्यात् स्मृतिसंतानरूपं दर्शनसमानाकारं ध्यानोपासनशब्दवाच्यम् इति अवगम्यते ।पुनश्च - 'नायमात्मा प्रवचनेन लभ्यो न मेधया न बहुना श्रुतेन ।यमेवैष वृणुते तेन लभ्यस्तस्यैष आत्मा विवृणुते तनूं स्वाम् ।।'  (मु0 उ0 3।2।3)इति विशेषणात् परेण आत्मना वरणीयताहेतुभूतं स्मर्यमाणविषयस्य अत्यर्थप्रियत्वेन स्वयम् अपि अत्यर्थप्रियरूपं स्मृतिसंतानम् एव उपासनशब्दवाच्यम् इति हि निश्चीयते, तद् एव भक्तिः इत्युच्यते 'स्नेहपूर्वमनुध्यानं भक्तिरित्युच्यते बुधैः' (लैङ्ग0 उ0 खं0) इति वचनात् । अतः 'तमेवं विद्वानमृत इह भवति'  (नृ0 पू0 उ0 1।6) 'नान्यः पन्था विद्यतेऽयनाय' (श्वेता0 3।8) 'नाहं वेदैर्न तपसा न दानेन न चेज्यया । शक्य एवंविधो द्रष्टुं दृष्टवानसि मां यथा ।। भक्त्या त्वनन्यया शक्य अहमेवंविधोऽर्जुन । ज्ञातुं द्रष्टुं च तत्त्वेन प्रवेष्टुं च परंतप ।।' (11।53-54) इत्यनयोः एकार्थत्वं सिद्धं भवति ।तत्र सप्तमे तावद् उपास्यभूतपरमपुरुषस्वरूपयाथात्म्यं प्रकृत्या तत्तिपोधानं तन्निवृत्तये भगवत्प्रपत्तिः उपासकविधाभेदो ज्ञानिनः श्रैष्ठ्यं  चोच्यते -श्रीभगवानुवाचमयि आभिमुख्येन आसक्तमनाः मत्प्रियत्वातिरेकेण मत्स्वरूपेण गुणैः च चेष्टितेन मद्विभूत्या विश्लेषे सति तत्क्षणाद् एव विशीर्यमाणस्वभावतया मयि सुगाढं बद्धमनाः मदाश्रयः तथा स्वयं च मया विना विशीर्यमाणतया मदाश्रयः मदेकाधारः मद्योगं युञ्जन् योक्तुं प्रवृत्तो योगविषयभूतं माम् असंशयं निःसंशयं समग्रं सकलं यथा ज्ञास्यसि येन ज्ञानेन उक्तेन ज्ञास्यसि तद् ज्ञानम् अवस्थितमनाः शृणु । 1 । COMMUNION THROUGH KNOWLEDGE and REALISATIONNow is introduced the means for the attainment of Narayana the Consortof Sri, the supreme goal of attainment, the Supreme Brahman, free from blemishes, the only cause of the universe, omniscient, who constitutes everything (as their inner controller and soul), whose resolves are true, who has vast manifestations - play-manifestations or Lila-Vibhutis and eternal-manifestations Nitya-Vibhutis. Worship (Upasana) is the means for attaining that Narayana. The vision of the nature of the individual self of the aspirant constitutes an element of that worship: This isaccomplishd by the practice of Karma Yoga preceded by knowledge of the self. This has been taught in the first group of six chapters.Now, in the middle group of six chapters the nature of the Supreme Person, who is the Supreme Brahman, as also His worship (Upasana)designated by the term Bhakti, are taught. The same instruction will be summarised later on in the verses beginning with 'Man reaches perfectionby worshipping with his duty Him, from whom has proceeded the activity of all substances (animate and inanimate), and by whom all this is pervaded' and ending with 'Forsaking egoism, power, pride, desire, wrath and sense of possessiveness and becoming tranquil - he becomes worthy of the state of Brahman. Having attained the state of Brahman,and being tranquil in mind, he neither grieves nor craves, regarding all beings alike. Thus he attains supreme devotion to Me' (18.53-54).It is established in the Vedanta texts that only Upasana (worship or meditation) which has taken the form of loving devotion constitutes the means for the attainment of the Supreme. What is declared as knowledge(Vedam) in passages such as, 'Knowing Him alone does one pass overdeath' (Sve.U., 3.8), 'Knowing Him alone one becomes immortal here' (Tai,A., 3.12.7) - has the same meaning as the texts like 'Verily the self should be seen... should be meditated upon steadily' (Br.U., 2.4.5), 'Let him worship the Self alone as the object to be attained' (Ibid., 1.4.15),'When the mind is pure, then the memory is firm, when the memory is attained, there is release from all knots of the heart' (Cha.U., 7.26.2), and 'The fetter of the heart is broken, all doubts are solved, all his works (Karmas) perish, when He has been seen, who is high and low' (Mun.U.,2.2.8). By virtue of these texts it is resolved that knowledge in the form of succession of memories having the same character as direct perception is expressed in the terms, meditation (Dhyana) and worship (Upasana).Again it is settled that what is expressed by the term 'worship' is really a succession of memories, which becomes the cause of being chosen by the Supreme Self, and which itself is very dear because the object of remembrance (which is the Supreme Himself) is very dear (to the worshipper). This is proved by the specification given by the text, 'The Self cannot be obtained by instruction, nor by worldly intelligence, nor by much hearing. He whom this Self chooses, by him alone He can be attained, and to him the Self reveals His own Person' (Ka.U.2.23; Mun.U.3.2.3). It is this succession of memories which is called Bhakti, as declared by texts like: 'Constant meditation accompanied with love is termed Bhakti' (Laingottara-purana).Therefore identity of meaning becomes proved between the following two passages: 'The knower of Him thus, becomes immortal here; there is no other path for his final release' (Tai.A., 3.12.7), and 'Neither by study of the Vedas, nor by austerities, nor by alms-giving, nor even bysacrifice, can I be seen as you have seen. But by singleminded devotion, O Arjuna, I can be thus truly known and seen and entered into' (11.53-54).Here in the seventh chapter are described five principal topics: (i) the real nature of the Supreme Person who is the object of worship, (ii) His concealment by Prakrti, (iii) surrender to the Lord for its removal, (iv) several kinds of devotees and (v) the superiority of the man of knowledge.The Lord said:Listen attentively to My words imparting knowledge to you, by which you will understand Me indubitably and fully - Me, the object of the Yogic contemplation in which you are engaged with a mind so deeply bound to Me by virtue of overwhelming love that it would disintegrate instantaneously the moment it is out of touch with My essential nature, attributes, deeds and glories, and with your very self resting so completely on Me that it would break up when bereft of Me.  
225 अहं ते मद्विषयम् इदं ज्ञानं विज्ञानेन सह अशेषतो वक्ष्यामि । विज्ञानं हि विविक्ताकारविषयं ज्ञानम्, यथा अहं मद्व्यतिरिक्तात् समस्तचिदचिद्वस्तुजातात् निखिलहेयप्रत्यनीकतयाअनवधिकातिशयासंख्येयकल्याणगुणगणानन्तमहाविभूतितया च विविक्तः तेन विविक्त-विषयज्ञानेन सह मत्स्वरूपविषयज्ञानं वक्ष्यामि । किं बहुना, यद् ज्ञानं ज्ञात्वा मयि पुनः अन्यद् ज्ञातव्यं न अवशिष्यते । 2 । I will declare to you in full this knowledge having Me for its object, along with Vijnana or distinguishing knowledge. Vijnana is that knowledge of God in which His nature is distinguished from all things. I am distinguished from all things, animate and inanimate, as the only Being opposed to all that is evil and endowed with infinitely great manifestation of countless multiples of attributes of all kinds which are auspicious, unsurpassed and without limit. I will declare to you that knowledge which has My essence as its object. Why say much? I shall declare to you that knowledge knowing which nothing else remains to be known again in relation to Myself.  
226 वक्ष्यमाणस्य ज्ञानस्य दुष्प्रापताम् आह -मनुष्याः शास्त्राधिकारयोग्याः तेषां सहस्रेषु कश्चिद् एव सिद्धिपर्यन्तं यतते । सिद्धिपर्यन्तं यतमानानां सहस्रेषु कश्चिद् एव मां विदित्वा मत्तः सिद्धये यतते । मद्विदां सहस्रेषु तत्त्वतोयथावत् स्थितं मां वेत्ति न कश्चिद् इति अभिप्रायः । 'स महात्मा सुदुर्लभः' (7।19) 'मां तु वेद न कश्चन' (7।26) इति हि वक्ष्यते । 3 । Sri Krshna declares that this knowledge, which will now be taught, is difficult to attain:'Men', i.e., those who are qualified for observing the commands of the Sastras - among thousands of such men, only some one strives till the attainment of perfection. Among thousands who strive till the attainmentof perfection, some one only, understanding Me, strives to attain success through Me (i.e., through My grace). Among thousands of those who might know Me, some one only knows Me in reality, as I am. In other words, there is no one who is capable of knowing Me as I am, i.e., as distinguished from all other entities, as implied in the expression Vijnana. Sri Krshna will declare later on: 'It is very hard to find such a great-souled person' (7.19), and 'But no one knows Me' (7.26).  
227 अस्य विचित्रानन्दभोग्यभोगोपकरणभोगस्थानरूपेण अवस्थितस्य जगतः प्रकृतिः इयंगन्धादिगुणकपृथिव्यप्तेजोवाय्वाकाशादिरूपेण मनः प्रभृतीन्द्रियरूपेण च महदहंकाररूपेण च अष्टधा भिन्ना मदीया इति विद्धि । 4 । Know that Prakrti, the material cause of this universe, which consists of endless varieties of objects and means of enjoyment and places of enjoyment, is divided into eightfold substances - earth, water, fire, air and ether, having smell, taste etc., as their attributes, and Manas alongwith kindred sense organs and the categories Mahat and ego-sense all belonging to Me.  
228 इयं मम अपरा प्रकृतिः, इतः तु अन्याम् इतः अचेतनायाः चेतनभोग्यभूतायाः प्रकृतेः विसजातीयाकारां जीवभूतां परं तस्याः भोक्तृत्वेन प्रधानभूतां चेतनरूपां मदीयां प्रकृतिं विद्धि यया इदम् अचेतनं कृत्स्नं जगद् धार्यते । 5 । This is My lower Prakrti. But know My higher Prakrti which is differentfrom this, i.e., whose nature is different from this inanimate Prakrti constituting the objects of enjoyment to animate beings. It is 'higher', i.e., is more pre-eminent compared to the lower Prakrti which is constituted only of inanimate substances. This higher Nature of Mine is the individual self. Know this as My higher Prakrti through which the whole inanimate universe is sustained.  
229 एतच्चेतनाचेतनसमष्टिरूपमदीयप्रकृतिद्वययोनीनि ब्रह्मादिस्तम्बपर्यन्तानि उच्चावचभावेन अवस्थितानि चिदचिन्मिश्राणि सर्वाणि भूतानि मदीयानि इति उपधारय, मदीयप्रकृतिद्वययोनीनिहि मदीयानि एव । तथा प्रकृतिद्वययोनित्वेन कृत्स्नस्य जगतः, तयोः द्वयोः अपि मद्योनित्वेन मदीयत्वेन च कृत्स्नस्यः जगतः अहम् एव प्रभवः अहम् एव प्रलयः अहम् एव च शेषी इति उपधारय ।तयोः  चिदचित्समष्टिभूतयोः प्रकृतिपुरुषयोः अपि परमपुरुषयोनित्वं श्रुतिस्मृतिसिद्धम् ।'महानव्यक्ते लीयते अव्यक्तमक्षरे लीयते अक्षरं तमसि लीयते तमः परे देवे एकीभवति' (सु0 उ0 2) 'विष्णोः स्वरूपात्परतोदिते द्वे रूपे प्रधानं पुरुषश्च' (वि0 पु0 1।2।24) 'प्रकृतिर्या मया ख्याता व्यक्ताव्यक्तस्वरूपिणी । पुरुषश्चाप्युभावेतौ लीयेते परमात्मनि ।। परमात्मा च सर्वेषामाधारः परमेश्वरः । विष्णुनामा स वेदेषु वेदान्तेषु च गीयते ।।' (वि0 पु0 6।4।38, 39)इत्यादिका हि श्रुतिस्मृतयः । 6 । Know that all beings from Brahma down to a tuft of grass, who have their origin in these two Prakrtis of Mine, are aggregated forms of the self and of inanimate matter. Irrespective of whether they are existing in a superior or inferior form, the selves and inanimate matter are mixedtogether in them. On account of their origination in My two Prakrtis, they are Mine. So, know that because the entire universe has its origination in these two Prakrtis which have their origination in Me, I am myself the origin and dissolution of the entire universe. For the same reason, I am its Lord (Seshin).It is proved on the basis of the Srutis and Smrtis that these two, Prakrti and Purusha (matter and the self), which form the aggregate of all animate and inanimate beings, have the Supreme Person as their cause. This is evident from Sruti and Smrti texts like the following: 'The Mahat resolves into Avyakta, Avyakta into Akshara, Akshara into Tamas, and Tamas becomes one with the Supreme Lord', (Su.U.2); 'O sage, distinct from the form of Vishnu, the Supreme Lord, the two forms, Prakrti and Purusha, arise' (V.P.1.2.24); and 'What was described by Me as Prakrti in its dual form of the manifest and the unmanifest, andthe Purusha do merge in the Supreme Self, and the Supreme Self is the support of all. He is the Supreme Lord named Vishnu, exalted in the Vedas and Vedanta' (V.P., 6.4.38-39).  
230 यथा सर्वकारणस्य अपि प्रकृतिद्वयस्य कारणत्वेन सर्वाचेतनवस्तुशेषिणः चेतनस्य अपि शेषित्वेन कारणतया शेषितया च अहं परतरः, तथा ज्ञानशक्तिबलादिगुणयोगेन च अहम् एव परतरः मत्तः अन्यत् मद्व्यतिरिक्तं किञ्चिद् ज्ञानबलादिगुणान्तरयोगि परतरं न अस्ति ।सर्वम् इदं चिदचिद्वस्तुजातं कार्यावस्थं कारणावस्थं च मच्छरीरभीतं सूत्रे मणिगणवदात्मतया अवस्थिते मयि प्रोतम् आश्रितम् । 'यस्य पृथिवी शरीरम्' (बृ0 उ0 3।7।3) 'यस्यात्मा शरीरम्' (बृ0 उ0 3।7।22) 'एष सर्वभूतान्तरात्मापहतपाप्मा, दिव्यो देव एको नारायणः (सु0 उ0 7) इति आत्मशरीरभावेनअवस्थानम् च जगद्ब्रह्मणोः अन्तर्यामिब्राह्मणादिषु सिद्धम् । 7 । I am absolutely superior to all in two ways: 1) I am the cause of both the Prakrtis and I am also their controlling master (Seshin). This controllership over inanimate nature is exercised through the animate Prakrti (the Jivas) who form the inner controller (Seshin) of their bodies which are constituted of inanimate nature. 2) I am supreme to all in another sense also - as the possessor of knowledge, power, strength etc., in an infinite degree. There is no entity other than Me with such attributes of an equal or superior nature. The aggregate of all the animate and inanimate things, 'whether in their causal state or in the state of effect, is strung on Me who abide as their Self, as a row or gems on a thread. They depend on Me. And it is proved that the universe of inanimate and animate beings exists as the body with Brahman (i.e. the Supreme Person) as their Self as declared by the Antaryami-brahmana and other texts: 'He whose body is the earth'(Br.U.3.7.3), 'He whose body is the self' (Br.U.Madh.3.722), and 'He isthe inner self of all beings, without evil, He is the Lord in the supreme heaven, He is the one Narayana' (Su.U.7).  
231 अतः सर्वस्य परमपुरुषरीरत्वेन आत्मभूतपरमपुरुषप्रकारत्वात् सर्वप्रकारः सर्वप्रकारः परमपुरुष एव अवस्थित इति सर्वैः शब्दैः तस्य एव अभिधानम् इति तत्तत्सामानाधिकरण्येन आह रसः अहम् इति चतुर्भिः -एते सर्वे विलक्षणा भावा मत्त एव उत्पन्नाः मच्छेषभूता मच्छरीरतया मयि एव अवस्थिताः, अतः तत्प्रकारः अहम् एव अवस्थितः । 8-11 । Thus, as everything constitutes the body of the Supreme Person forming only a mode of His who is their Self, the Supreme Person alone exists, and all things (which we speak of as diversity) are only His modes. Therefore all terms used in common parlance for different things denoteHim only. Sri Krshna shows this by coordinating some important ones among these entities with Himself.All these entities with their peculiar characteristics are born from Me alone. They depend on Me; in as much as they constitute My body, they exist in Me alone. Thus I alone exist while all of them are only My modes.   
232 किं विशिष्य अभिधीयते, सात्त्विकाः राजसाः तामसाः च जगति भोग्यत्वेन देहत्वेन इन्द्रियत्वेनतत्तद्धेतुत्वेन च अवस्थिता ये भावाः तान् सर्वान् मत्त एव उत्पन्नान् विद्वि ते मच्छरीरतया मयि एव अवस्थिता इति च । न तु अहं तेषु न अहं कदाचिद् अपि तदायत्तस्थितिः, अन्यत्र आत्मायत्तस्थितित्वे अपि शरीरस्य शरीरेण आत्मनः स्थितौ अपि उपकारो विद्यते, मम तु तैःन कश्चिद् तथाविध उपकारः केवलं लीला एव प्रयोजनम् इत्यर्थः । 12 । Why should this be declared with particular illustrations? The reason is as follows: Whatever entities exist in the world partaking of the qualities of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas in the forms of bodies, senses, objects of enjoyment and their causes - know them all to have originated from Mealone, and they abide in Me alone, as they constitute My body. 'But I amnot in them.' That is, I do not depend for My existence on them at any time. In the case of other beings, though the body depends for its existence on the self, the body serves some purpose of the self in the matter of Its sustenance. To Me, however, there is no purpose at all of that kind served by them constituting My body. The meaning is that theymerely serve the purpose of My sport.  
233 तदेवं चेतनाचेतनात्मकं कृत्स्नं जगत् मदीयं काले काले मत्त एव उत्पद्यते मयि च प्रलीयते मयि एव अवस्थितं मच्छरीरभूतं मदात्मकं च, इति अहम् एव कार्यावस्थायां कारणावस्थायां चसर्वशरीरतया सर्वप्रकार एवस्थितः । अतः कारणत्वेन शेषित्वेन च ज्ञानाद्यसंख्येयकल्याण-गुणगणैः च अहम् एव सर्वैः प्रकारैः परतरः । मत्तः अन्यत् केन अपि कल्याणगुणगणेन परतरं न विद्यते । एवंभूतं मां त्रिभ्यः सात्त्विकराजतामसगुणमयेभ्यः भावेभ्यः परं मदसाधारणैः कल्याणगुणगणैः तत्तद्भोग्यताप्रकारैः च परम् उत्कृष्टतमम् अव्ययं सदा एकरूपम् अपि तैः एव त्रिभिः गुणमयैः निहीनतरैः क्षणविध्वंसिभिः पूर्वकर्मानुगुणदेहेन्द्रियभोग्यत्वेन अवस्थितैः पदार्थैः मोहितं देवतिर्यङ्मनुष्यस्थावरात्मना अवस्थितम् इदं जगत् न अभिजानाति । 13 । Now, in this way, the whole universe, consisting of animate and inanimate, entities belonging to Me, evolves from time to time from Me only, is absorbed in Me, and abides in Me alone. It constitutes My body and has Me for its self. Whether in the causal state or in the state of effect, it is I who have all these entities as My modes, because allentities form My body. Thus, in regard to all these modes, I am superior to them, as I am their cause, principal, and as I possess a complex of countless auspicious attributes like knowledge, strength etc. In every way I remain as the highest being. There exists none higher than Myself.Such being the case, I am superior to these entities composed of the qualities of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas - superior to them by My extraordinary attributes and by having these various modes for My enjoyment. I am the highest and immutable, i.e., I form a unity in Myself. This world constituted of gods, men, animals and immovables,and deluded by the three Gunas of Prakrti and its evolutes are inferior and transient. The forms of bodies, senses and objects of enjoyment comprising the world are there in accordance with their past Karmas. No one in the world knows Me.  
234 कथं स्वत एव अनवधिकातिशयानन्दे नित्ये सदा एकरूपे लौकिककवस्तुभोग्यताप्रकारैः चउत्कृष्टतमे त्वयि स्थिते अपि अत्यन्तनिहीनेषु गुणमयेषु अस्थिरेषु भावेषु सर्वस्य भोक्तृवर्गस्य भोग्यत्वबुद्धिः उपजायते इत्यत्र आह -मम एषा गुणमयी सत्त्वरजस्तमोमयी माया यस्माद् दैवी देवेन क्रीडाप्रवृत्तेन मया एव निर्मितातस्मात्सर्वैः दुरत्यया दुरतिक्रमा ।अस्याः मायाशब्दवाच्यत्वम् आसुरराक्षसास्त्रादीनाम् इव विचित्रकार्यकरत्वेन, यथा च 'ततो भगवता तस्य रक्षार्थं चक्रमुत्तमम् । आजगाम समाज्ञप्तं ज्वालामालि सुदर्शनम् ।। तेन मायासहस्रं तच्छम्बरस्याशुगामिना । बालस्य रक्षता देहमेकैकांशेन सूदितम् ।।' (वि0 पु0 1।19।19-20) इत्यादौ ।अतो मायाशब्दो न मिथ्यार्थवाची । ऐन्द्रजालिकादिषु अपि केनचिद् मन्त्रौषधादिना मिथ्यार्थविषयायाः पारमार्थिक्या एव बुद्धेः उत्पादकत्वेन मायावी इति प्रयोगः । तथा मन्त्रौषधधादिः एव च तत्र माया, सर्वप्रयोगेषु अनुगतस्य एकस्य एव शब्दार्थत्वात् । तत्र मिथ्यार्थेषु मायाशब्दप्रयोगो मायाकार्यबुद्विविषयत्वेन औपचारिकः, 'मञ्चाः क्रोशन्ति' इतिवत् । एषा गुणमयी पारमार्थिकी भगवन्माया एव 'मायां तु प्रकृतिं विद्यान्मायिनं तु महेश्वरम्' (श्वे0 उ0 4।10) इत्यादिषु अभिधीयते ।अस्याः कार्यं भगवत्स्वरूपतिरोधानं स्वस्वरूपभोग्यत्वबुद्धिः च, अतो भगवन्मायया मोहितंसर्वं जगद् भगवन्तम् अनवधिकातिशयानन्दस्वरूपं न अभिजानाति । मायाविमोचनोपायम् आह -माम् एव सत्यसंकल्पं परमकारुणिकम् अनालोविशेषाशेषलोकशरण्यं ये शरणं प्रपद्यन्ते ते एतां मदीयां गुणमयीं मायां तरन्ति । मायाम् उत्सृज्य माम् एव उपासत इत्यर्थः । 14 । How is it possible that all experiencing beings think as enjoyable objects which are inferior, constituted of the Gunas and are transient, while You exist - You who are of the nature of unbounded and abundant bliss, who has an eternal unchanging form and who is the source of the enjoyableness of even the objects of the world? Sri Krshna replies:This Maya of Mine consists of the three Gunas, Sattva, Rajas and Tamas. Because it is created by Me, the Divine, for purposes of sport, it is divine in its power and therefore difficult to overcome. The word Maya is used for the effects of the three Gunas, because it has got the power of generating wonderful effects as in the case of the magic of Asuras and Rakshasas. See the passages: 'Then the excellent discus, the flaming Sudarsana; was despatched by the Lord to defend the boy.The thousand Mayas or wonderfully created weapons of the evil-designed Sambara were foiled one after another, by that quickly moving discus, for protecting the body of the boy' (V.P.1.19.19-20).Here the term Maya does not signify the sense of 'false'. Even with regard to magicians, when the term, Mayavin (one who possesses Maya)is used, there is origination of real impressions with the aid of certain incantations, herbs etc., though the objects created are illusory things. Accordingly the term Maya denotes the incantations, herbs etc., which have got the power of creating real impressions. Inasmuch as the sense of the term should be invariable, following the usage in all cases, the term Maya can be applied to the illusory objects, only in a secondary sense, while its primary sense is in regard to the real impressions generated in the mind. It is just like in the statement 'The cots cry.'The Maya of the Lord, which is absolutely real and which consists of the Gunas, is alone taught in the texts like, 'Know then Maya to be the Prakrti and the possessor of the Maya to be the great Lord' (Sve.U.4.10).It not only obscures the essential nature of the Lord but also creates the condition of the mind that sees its objects as enjoyable. Therefore, the entire universe, deluded by the Lord's Maya, does not know the Lord who is of the nature of boundless beatitude. (On the other hand they feel objects set forth by Maya as enjoyable). Sri Krshna teaches the way of deliverance from Maya:But those who take refuge in Me alone - Me whose resolves are always true, who has supreme compassion, and who is the refuge of all beings without exception and without consideration of their particular status -such persons shall pass beyond this Maya of Mine consisting of the three Gunas. The meaning is that they worship Me alone, renouncing the Maya.   
235 किमिति भगवदुपासनापादिनीं भगवत्प्रपत्तिं सर्वे न कुर्वन्ति? इत्यत्र आह -मां दुष्कृतिनः पापकर्माणो दुष्कृततारतम्यात् चतुर्विधा न प्रपद्यन्ते मूढा नराधमाः, माययाअपहृतज्ञाना आसुरं भावम् आश्रिताः इति । मूढाः विपरीतज्ञानाः पूर्वोक्तप्रकारेण मत्स्वरूपापरिज्ञानात् प्राकृतेषु एव विषयेषु सक्ताः पूर्वोक्तप्रकारेण भगच्छेषतैकरसम् आत्मानंभोग्यजातं च स्वशेषतया मन्यमानाः ।नराधमाः सामन्येन ज्ञाने अपि मत्स्वरूपे मदौन्मुख्यानर्हाः ।मायया अपहृतज्ञानाः तु मद्विषयं मदैश्वर्यविषयं च ज्ञानं प्रस्तुतम् येषां तदसंभावनापादिनीभिःकूटयुक्तिभिः अपहृतं ते तथोक्ताः ।आसुरं भावम् आश्रिताः तु मद्विषयं मदैश्वर्यविषयं च ज्ञानं सुदृढम् उपपन्नं येषां द्वेषाय एव भवति ते आसुरं भावम् आश्रिताः । उत्तरोत्तराः पापिष्ठतमाः । 15 । Why, then, do all not take recourse to refuge in the Lord which is conducive to the worship of the Lord?'Evil-doers', those who commit evil deeds, do not resort to Me. They are of four types, according to the degree of their evil deeds: (i) the foolish, (ii) the lowest of men, (iii) those persons deprived of knowledge by Maya, and (iv) those given to demoniac nature. 'The foolish' are those who have misconceived knowledge. True knowledge consists in understanding that the self is dependent on the Lord and exists for Him. But 'the foolish' think they are independent and also that all enjoyable things of the world are their own and for their enjoyment. 'The lowest of men' are those who are incapable of turning towards Me, even though My essential nature is known to them generally. 'Persons who are deprived of knowledge by Maya' are those who, though possessing knowledge about Me and My manifestations, are moved by deceitful reasonings to contend that such knowledge is inconsistent and impossible. 'Those of demoniac nature' are those who have positive knowledge about Myself and My manifestation but hate Me. Theintensity of sinfulness increases in these types in the order in which they are successively placed.  
236 सुकृतिनः पण्यकर्माणो मां शरणम् उपगम्य माम् एव भजन्ते । ते च सुकृततारतम्येन चतुर्विधाः,सुकृतगरीयस्त्वेन प्रतिपत्तिवैशेष्याद् उत्तरोत्तराधिकतमाः भवन्ति ।आर्त्तः प्रतिष्ठाहीनो भ्रष्टैश्वर्यः पुनस्तत्प्राप्तिकामः । अर्थार्थी अप्राप्तैश्वर्यतया ऐश्वर्यकामः, तयोः मुखभेदमात्रम्, ऐश्वर्यविषयतया ऐक्याद् एक एव अधिकारः ।जिज्ञासुः प्रकृतिवियुक्तात्मस्वरूपावाप्तीच्छुः ज्ञानम् एव अस्य स्वरूपम् इति जिज्ञासुः इति उक्तम् ।ज्ञानी च 'इतस्त्वन्यां प्रकृतिं विद्धि मे पराम्' (7।5) इत्यादिना अभिहितभगवच्छेषतैकरसात्म-स्वरूपवित् प्रकृतिवियुक्तकेवलात्मनि अपर्यवस्यन् भगवन्तं प्रेप्सुः भगवन्तम् परमप्राप्यं मन्वानः । 16 । 'Men of good deeds,' i.e., those who have meritorious Karmas to their credit, and who resort to Me and worship Me alone - they too are divided into four types according to the degrees of their good deeds, each subsequent type being better than the preceding, because of the greatness of their good deeds and gradation in respect of their knowledge.(i) The 'distressed' is one who has lost his position in life and his wealth, and who wishes to regain them (ii) He who 'aspires for wealth' is one who desires for wealth, which he has not till then attained. Between them the difference is very little, as both of them seek wealth, (iii) He 'who seeks after knowledge' is one who wishes to realise the real nature of the self (in Its pure state) as an entity different from the Prakrti, He is called 'one who seeks to secure knowledge;' because knowledge alone is the essential nature of theself'; (iv) And the 'man of knowledge' is he who knows that, it is the essential nature of the self to find happiness only as the Sesha (subsidiary or liege) of the Lord, as taught in the text beginning with, 'But know that which is other than this (lower nature) to be the higher Prakrti' (7.5). Without stopping with the knowledge of the self as different from the Prakrti, he desires to attain the Lord. He thinks that the Lord alone is the highest aim to reach.  
237 तेषां ज्ञानी विशिष्यते, कुतः नित्ययुक्त एकभक्तिः इति च । तस्य हि मदेकप्राप्यस्य मया योगोनित्यः । इतरयोस्तु यावत्स्वाभिलषितप्राप्ति मया योगः । तथा ज्ञानिनो मयि एकस्मिन् एव भक्तिः, इतरयोः तु स्वाभिलषिते तत्साधनत्वेन मयि च । अतः स एव विशिष्यते ।किं च प्रियो हि ज्ञानिनोऽत्यर्थम् अहम् - अत्र अत्यर्थशब्दो अभिधेयवचनः, ज्ञानिनः अहं यथा प्रियः तथा मया सर्वज्ञेन सर्वशक्तिना अपि अभिधातुं न शक्यते इत्यर्थः, प्रियत्वस्य इयत्ता-रहितत्वात् । यथा ज्ञानिनाम् अग्रेसरस्य प्रहृलादस्य - 'स त्वासक्तमतिः कृष्णे दश्यमानो महोरगैः । न विवेदात्मनो गात्रं तत्स्मृत्याह्लादसंस्थितः' (वि0 पु0 1।17।39) इति सः अपि तथा एव मम प्रियः । 17 । Of these four, 'the man of knowledge' is the foremost.Why? Because of being ever with Me in Yoga and devoted to the One only. To the man of knowledge the attainment of Myself being the only end in view, he is ever with Me. As for the others, they contemplate on Me only until the fulfilment of their desires. But to the man of knowledge, there is single-minded devotion to Me only. Unlike him, the others, want only the objects of their desire and they are devoted to Me only as a means for gaining them. Hence he, the man of knowledge, alone is the foremost. Further I am very dear to the man of knowledge. Here the term 'artha' in relation to the expression 'athyartham' denotes 'what cannot be expressed adequately'. That is, even I, the omniscient andomnipotent, is unable to express how much I am dear to the Jnanin, since there is no such limit as 'this much' for this love. Such is the meaning. As in the case of Prahlada, the foremost among men of knowledge, it is said: 'But he with his thoughts firmly fixed on Krshna while being bitten by the great serpents, felt no pain from the wounds, being immersed in rapturous recollections of Him' (V .P.1.17.39). I reciprocate this love infinitely.  
238 सर्वे एव एते माम् एव उपासते इति उदाराः वदान्याः ये मत्तो यत् किञ्चिद् अपि गृह्णन्ति, ते हिमम सर्वस्वदायिनः । ज्ञानी तु आत्मा एव मे मतं तदायत्तात्मधारणः अहम् इति मन्ये ।कस्माद् एवं यस्माद् अयं मया विना आत्मधारणासंभावनया माम् एव अनुत्तमं प्राप्यम् आस्थितः, अतः तेन विना मम अपि आत्मधारणं न संभवति, ततो मम अपि आत्मा हि सः । 18 । Because they worship Me alone, aIl these are generous i.e., benefactors. For, those who receive from Me anything, however small they are, I consider them as contributing everything to Me (and thus as benefactors).But I deem the man of knowledge to be My very self. I consider Myselfas depending on him for My support. Why is it so? Because this person considers Me to be the highest and finds it impossible to support himself without Me; I also find it impossible to be without him. Thus, verily, he is My self.  
239 न अल्पसंख्यासंख्यातानां पुण्यजन्मनां फलम् इदं यन्मच्छेषतैकरसात्मयाथात्म्यज्ञानपूर्वकं मत्प्रपदनम् अपि तु -बहूनां जन्मनां पुण्यजन्मनाम् अन्ते अवसाने वासुदेवशेषतैकरसः अहं तदायत्तस्वरूपस्थिति-प्रवृत्तिः च, स च असंख्येयैः कल्याणगुणैः परतरः इति ज्ञानवान् भूत्वा वासुदेव एव मम परमप्राप्यं प्रापकं च अन्यदपि यन्मनोरथवर्ति स एव मम तत् सर्वम् इति मां यः प्रपद्यते माम् उपास्ते स महात्मा महामनाः सुदुर्लभः दुर्लभतरः लोके ।'वासुदेवः सर्वम्' इत्यस्य अयम् एव अर्थः । 'प्रियो हि ज्ञानिनोऽत्यर्थमहम्' (7।17) 'आस्थितः स हि युक्तात्मा मामेवानुत्तमां गतिम्' (7।18) इति प्रक्रमात् ।ज्ञानवान् च अयम् उक्तलक्षण एव, अस्य एव पूर्वोक्तज्ञानित्वात् ।'भूमिरापः' इति आरभ्य 'अहङ्कार इतीयं मे भिन्ना प्रकृतिरष्टधा । अपरेयमितस्त्वन्यां प्रकृतिं विद्धि मे पराम् ।। जीवभूताम्' (7।4,5) इति हि चेतनाचेतनस्य प्रकृतिद्वयस्य परमपुरुष-शेषतैकरसता उक्ता 'अहं कृत्स्नस्य जगतः प्रभवः प्रलयस्तथा । मत्तः परतरं नान्यत् किञ्चिदस्ति धनंजय' (7।6,7) इति आरभ्य ये चैव सात्त्विका भावा राजसास्तामसाश्च ये । मत्त एवेति तान्विद्धि न त्वहं तेषु ते मयि ।। (7।12) इति प्रकृतिद्वयस्य कार्यकारणोभयावस्थस्य परमपुरुषायत्तस्वरूपस्थितिप्रवृत्तित्वं परमपुरुषस्य च सर्वैः प्रकारैः सर्वस्मात् परतरत्वम् उक्तम्; अतः स एव अत्र ज्ञानी इति उच्यते । 19 । The attainment of this state of mind requires innumerable auspicious births. It is attained after gaining the knowledge of the real nature of the self and the self feels that Its happiness consists in being a dependant (Sesha) of Myself.Further after passing through innumerable auspicious births, one gets the knowledge: 'I find my sole joy as a Sesha of Vasudeva. I find my essence, existence and activities to be dependent on Him. He is superior over all others on account of His innumerable auspicious attributes.' Consequent to this knowledge he resorts to Me, i.e., meditates on Me, realising, Vasudeva alone is my highest end and also the means for attaining it, and whatever other desire remains in the mind, He alone isall that too for me'. Such a great-souled person, i.e., great-minded man is hard to find. It is very hard to find such persons in this world. This is the only meaning of the statement that 'Vasudeva is all,' because of the topic having been begun with the statements: 'For I am very dear to the man of knowledge' (7.17) and 'For he, integrated, is devoted to Me aloneas the highest end' (7.18). It is so, also because that Jnanin whose traits are given here, possesses the same qualities as the man of knowledge described earlier.For, it has been said that the two Prakrtis, the animate and the inanimate,have their sole essence in being the Sesha (dependants) of the Supreme Person in the verses beginning with 'Earth, water' (7.4) and ending with,'Ego-sense, thus My Prakrti is divided eightfold. This is my lower (Prakrti). But know that which is other, than this (lower nature) and forms the life-principle to be the higher Prakrti' (7.4-5). Then take the text beginning from 'I am the origin and, dissolution of the whole universe. There is nothing higher than Myself, O Arjuna' (7.6-7), and ending with, 'Know that all the states of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas are from Me alone. But I am not in them. They are in Me' (7.12). It has been declared in these texts that the two Prakrtis, both in their states of cause and effect, depend upon Him for their essence, existence and activities and that the Supreme Person is superior to everything in allrespects. Therefore the knower of this truth alone is here spoken of as a man of knowledge or as one knowing 'All this is Vasudeva'. [The purpose of this explanation is to eliminate any pure monistic slant to this passage].  
240 तस्य ज्ञानिनो दुर्लभत्वम् एव उपपादयति -सर्वे एव हि लैकिकाः पुरुषाः स्वया प्रकृत्या पापवासनया गुणमयभावविषयया नियता नित्यान्विताः तैः तैः स्ववासनानुरूपैः गुणमयैः एव कामैः इच्छाविषयभूतैः हृतमत्स्वरूपविषय-ज्ञानाः तत्तत्कामसिद्ध्यर्थम् अन्यदेवताः मद्व्यतिरिक्ताः केवलेन्द्रादिदेवताः तं तं नियमम् आस्थाय तत्तद्देवताविशेषमात्रप्रीणनाय असाधारणं नियमम् आस्थाय प्रपद्यन्ते ता एव आश्रित्य अर्चयन्ते । 20 । Sri Krshna now explains the rarity of finding such a person of knowledge.All men of this world are 'controlled', i.e., constantly accompanied by their own nature consisting in the vasanas (subtle impressions) resulting from relation with the objects formed of the Gunas. Their knowledge about My essential nature is robbed by various Karmas, i.e., by objects of desire corresponding to their Vasanas (subtle impressions), born of their Karmas and constituted of Gunas. In order to fulfil these various kinds of desires they take refuge in, i.e., seek and worship, other divinities who are regarded as different from Me, such as Indra and others, observing various disciplines, i.e., practising rituals which are specially meant to propitiate only these divinities.  
241 ता अपि देवताः मदीयाः तनवः 'य आदित्ये तिष्ठन्यमादित्यो न वेद, यस्यादित्यः शरीरम्' (बृ0 उ0 3।7।9) इत्यादिश्रुतिभिः प्रतिपादिताः मदीयाः तनवः । इति अजानन् अपि यो यो यां यां मदीयाम् इन्द्रादिकां तनुं भक्तः श्रद्वया अर्चितुम् इच्छति, तस्य तस्य अजानतः अपिमत्तनुविषया एषा श्रद्धा इति अहम् एव अनुसन्धाय ताम् एव अचलां निर्विघ्नां विदधामि अहम् । 21 । These divinities, too constitute My body as taught in the Sruti text like: 'He who, dwelling in the sun, whom the sun does not know, whose body is the sun' (Br.U.3.7.9). Whichever devotee seeks to worship with faith whatever form of Mine, such as, the Indra, although not knowing these divinities to be My forms, I consider his faith as being directed to My bodies or manifestations, and make his faith steadfast, i.e., make it free from obstacles.  
242 स तया निर्विघ्नया श्रद्धया युक्तः तस्य इन्द्रादेः आराधनं प्रति ईहते चेष्टते ततः मत्तनुभूतेन्द्रादि-देवताराधनात् तान् एव हि स्वाभिलषितान् कामान् मया एव विहितान् लभते ।यद्यपि आराधनकाले इन्द्रादयो मदीयाः तनवः, तत एव तदर्चनं च मदाराधनम् इति न जानाति,तस्य वस्तुतो मदाराधनत्वाद् आराधकाभिलषितम् अहम् एव विदधामि । 22 । He, endowed with that faith without obstacles, performs the worship of Indra and other divinities. Thence, i.e., from the worship of Indra and other divinities, who constitute My body, he attains the objects of his desire, which are in reality granted by Me alone. Although he does not know at the time of worship that divinities like Indra, who are his objects of worship, are My body only, and that worship of them is My worship, still, in as much as this worship is, in reality, My worship, he attains his objects of desire granted by Me alone.  
243 तेषाम् अल्पमेधसाम् अल्पबुद्धीनाम् इन्द्रादिमात्रयाजिनां तदाराधनफलं स्वल्पम् अन्तवत् च भवति । कुतः? देवान् देवयजो यान्ति यत इन्द्रादीन् देवान् तद्याजिनो यान्ति । इन्द्रादयो हि परिच्छिन्नभोगाः परिमितकालवर्तिनश्च । ततः तत्सायुज्यं प्राप्ताः तैः सह प्रच्यवन्ते ।मद्भक्ता अपि तेषाम् एव कर्मणां मदाराधनरूपतां ज्ञात्वा परिच्छिन्नफलसङ्गं त्यक्त्वा मत्प्रीणनैकप्रयोजनाः माम् एव प्राप्नुवन्ति, न च पुनर्निवर्तन्ते 'मामुपेत्य तु कौन्तेय पुनर्जन्म नविद्यते' (8।16) इति वक्ष्यते । 23 । The men of 'small understanding' means those whose understanding is poor, who worship only Indra and other divinities. The fruit of their worship is small and finite. Why? The worshippers of divinities like Indra go to the divinities. And Indra and other divinities possess limitedjoy and live only for a limited time. So if they attain equality of enjoyment with them, they also fall down along with them in due course; but My devotees, knowing that their acts are of the nature of My worship, renouncing attachment for finite fruits, reach Me, having for their purpose the pleasing of Me alone. That is, they never more return to Samsara. For Sri Krshna teaches later on: 'But on reaching Me there is no rebirth, O Arjuna' (8.16).  
244 इतरे तु सर्वसमाश्रयणीयत्वाय मम मनुष्यादिषु अवतारम् अपि अकिचित्करं कुर्वन्ति इत्याह -सर्वैः कर्मभिः आराध्यः अहं सर्वेश्वरः वाङ्मनसापरिच्छेद्यस्वरूपस्वभावः परमकारुण्याद् आश्रितवात्सल्यात् च सर्वसमाश्रयणीयत्वाय अजहत्स्वभाव एव वसुदेवसूनुः अवतीर्ण इति मम एवं परं भावम् अव्ययम् अनुत्तमम् अजानन्तः प्राकृतराजसूनुसमानम् इतः पूर्वम् अनभिव्यक्तम् इदानीं कर्मवशाद् जन्मविशेषं प्राप्य व्यक्तिम् प्राप्तं माम् अबुद्धयो मन्यन्ते अतो मां न श्रयन्ते, न कर्मभिः आराधयन्ति च । 24 । Now Sri Krshna declares: 'But these others (i.e., who worship Indra etc.)regard as insignificant even My incarnations among men and other beings in order to make Myself easy for all to resort to. Ignorant people do not know My higher nature, immutable and unsurpassed. They do not know that it is I, who is worshipped through all rites, who is the Lord of all, and whose nature is beyond speech and mind, that has incarnated as the son of Vasudeva, without abandoning My divine nature, out of My supreme compassion and parental love for those who resort to Me and in order that I may be the refuge of all. They consider Me as only a worldly prince who was not manifest beforeand who has now become manifest by Karma and has secured a special form. Therefore, they do not resort to Me, nor do they worship Me.  
245 कुत एवं न प्रकाश्यते इति, अत्र आह -क्षेत्रज्ञासाधारणमनुष्यत्वादिसंस्थानयोगाख्यमायया समावृतः अहं न सर्वस्य प्रकाशः । मयिमनुष्यत्वादिसंस्थानदर्शनमात्रेण मूढः अयं लोको माम् अतिवाय्विन्द्रकर्माणम् अतिसूर्याग्नितेजसम्उपलभ्यमानम् अपि अजम् अव्ययं निखिलजगदेककारणं सर्वेश्वरं मां सर्वसमाश्रयणीयत्वाय मनुष्यत्वसंस्थानम् आस्थितं न अभिजानाति । 25 । Why is He not manifest (to them)? Sri Krshna says:Concealed by the Maya called Yogamaya, I am associated with a humanform and other generic structures which are special to individual selves. Because of this I am not manifest to all. The foolish, by seeing in Me merely the human or the other generic structures, do not know that My powers are greater than those of vayu and Indra, that My lustre is more brilliant than that of sun and fire, that though visible to all, I am unborn, immutable, the cause of all the worlds, the Lord of all, and that I have assumed a human form, so that all who want can take refuge in Me.  
246 अतीतानि वर्तमानानि अनागतानि च सर्वाणि भूतानि अहं वेद जानामि मां तु वेद न कश्चन । मया अनुसन्धीयमानेषु कालत्रयवर्तिषु भूतेषु माम् एवंविधं वासुदेवं सर्वसमाश्रयणीयतया अवतीर्णं विदित्वा माम् एव समाश्रयम् न कश्चिद् उपलभ्यत इत्यर्थः । अतो ज्ञानी सुदुर्लभ एव । 26 । I know all beings that have passed away, those that live now and those that will live hereafter. But no one knows Me. Among the beings existing in the three-fold divisions of time whom I look after, no one understands Me as of the nature described and as Vasudeva incarnated to be a refuge for all. So no one resorts to Me. Therefore, the one whoknows Me really (Jnanin) is extremely difficult to be found. Such is the meaning.  
247 तथाहि -इच्छाद्वेषाभ्यां समुत्थेन शीतोष्णादिद्वन्द्वाख्येन मोहेन सर्वभूतानि सर्गे जन्मकाल एव संमोहं यान्ति । एतद् उक्तं भवति - गुणमयेषु सुखदुःखादिद्वन्देषु पूर्वपूर्वजन्मनि यद्विषयौ इच्छाद्वेषौ रागद्वेषौ अभ्यस्तौ तद्वासनया पुनरपि जन्मकाल एव तदेव द्वन्द्वाख्यम् इच्छाद्वेषविषयत्वेन समुपस्थितं भूतानां मोहनं भवति तेन मोहेन सर्वभूतानि संमोहं यान्ति, तद्विषयेच्छाद्वेषस्वभावानिभवन्ति, न मत्संश्लेषवियोगसुखदुःखस्वभावानि । ज्ञानी तु मत्संश्लेषवियोगैकसुखदुःस्वभावः, न तत्स्वभावं किमपि भूतं जायते इति । 27 । So also:As Soon as beings are born they are deluded. This delusion springs from sense experiences described as pairs of opposites like heat and cold. Such reactions spring from desire and hate.The purport is this: Desire and hatred for the pairs of opposites like pleasure and pain, which are constituted of Gunas, have their origin in the Jivas from the past experiences they had in their previous births. The subtle impressions or Vasanas of these previous experiences manifestagain as instinctive desire and hatred towards similar objects in every succeeding birth of the Jivas. The delusive force of these impressions make them deluded from the very beginning. It becomes their nature to have love orbatred for such objects, in place of having happiness andmisery at union with or separation from Me. The Jnanin, however, feels happiness when he is in union with Me and misery when separated from Me. No other being is born with such a nature as found in the Jnanin.  
248 येषां तु अनेकजन्मार्जितेन उत्कृष्टपुण्यसंचयेन गुणमयं द्वन्द्वेच्छाद्वेषहेतुभूतं मदौन्मुख्यविरोधि चअनादिकालप्रवृत्तं पापम् अन्तगतं क्षीणम् ते पूर्वोक्तेन सुकृततारतम्येन मां शरणम् अनुप्रपद्यगुणमयान्मोहाद् विनिर्मुक्ताः जरामरणमोक्षाय प्रकृतिवियुक्तात्मस्वरूपदर्शनाय महते च ऐश्वर्यायमत्प्राप्तये च दृढव्रताः दृढसंकल्पा माम् एव भजन्ते । 28 । However, there are some whose sins, accruing from beginningless time, which cause desire or hatred to the pairs of opposites and annul the tendency towards Me, have come to an end, i.e., have become weakened, through the accumulation of good actions in numerous births.They resort to Me, devoid of delusion produced by the Gunas, and worship Me alone in proportion to the excellence of their Karmas previously described. In order to attain deliverance from old age and death and for acquiring the supreme consummation of reaching Me, they remain steadfast in their vows.  
249 तत्र तेषां त्रयाणां भगवन्तं भजमानानां ज्ञातव्यविशेषान् उपादेयांश्च प्रस्तौति -जरामरणमोक्षाय प्रकृतिवियुक्तात्मस्वरूपदर्शनाय माम् आश्रित्य ये यतन्ते ते तद् ब्रह्म विदुः,अध्यात्मं च कृत्स्नं विदुः, कर्म च अखिलं विदुः । 29 । Sri Krshna enumerates what special things are to be known and what ought to be attained by these three classes of votaries of God:Those who take refuge in Me and strive for deliverance from old age and death, i.e., for the vision of the real nature of the self as distinct from the Prakrti, they know brahman (the pure individual self). They also know all about the individual self, and the whole of Karma. [This attainment is known as Kaivalya, which means the aloofness of the self in absorption in Its own bliss].  
250 अत्र य इति पुनर्निर्देशात् पूर्वनिर्दिष्टेभ्यः अन्ये अधिकारिणो ज्ञायन्ते ।साधिभूतं साधिदैवं माम् ऐश्वर्यार्थेनो ये विदुः इत्येतद् अनुवादस्वरूपम् अपि अप्राप्तार्थत्वात् तद्विधायकम् एव ।तथा साधियज्ञम् इत्यपि त्रयाणाम् अधिकारिणाम् अविशेषेण विधीयते, अर्थस्वाभाव्यात् त्रयाणां हि नित्यनैमित्तिकरूपमहायज्ञाद्यनुष्ठानम् अवर्जनीयम् ।ते च प्रयाणकालेऽपि स्वाप्राप्यानुगुणं मां विदुः ।'ते च' इति चकारात् पूर्वे जरामरणणोक्षाय यतमानाश्च प्रयाणकालेऽपि विदुः, इति समुच्चीयन्ते ।अनेन ज्ञानिनः अपि अर्थस्वाभाव्यात् साधियज्ञं मां विदुः प्रयाणकाले अपि स्वप्राप्यानुगुणं मां विदुः इति उक्तं भवति । 30 । Here, other qualified persons distinct from those already mentioned (i.e., those who desire Kaivalya) are to be understood, because of the mention again of the term 'those' (ye). Even though the declaration - those seekers of fortune who know Me as being connected 'with the higher material entities' (Adhibhuta) and 'with that which is higher to divinities' (Adhidaiva) i.e., the self in Its lordship - resembles a repetition, it is really an injunction on account of the meaning not being known otherwise. The statement of knowing Me as being connected with the sacrifice is also enjoined as an injunction for all the three typesof differently qualified aspirants (those who aspire for Kaivalya, wealth and liberation) without any difference, because of the nature of the subject matter, that being sacrificial. None of the three types of aspirants can give up the performance of the great sacrifices and other rituals in the form of periodical and occasional rituals. They know Me at the hour of death in a way corresponding with their objectives.Because of the term ca (too) in 'they too,' those who have been mentioned before as 'striving for release from old age and death' are also to be understood along with the others as knowing Me at the hour of death. By this, even the Jnanin knows Me as being connected with the sacrifice on account of the nature of the meaning of the subject treated (i.e., sacrifice), They also know Me even at the hour of death in a way corresponding with their objective .The purport is that, besides the othersmentioned earlier like the knower of the Self, those others who are nowdescribed as knowing Him with Adhibhuta, Adhidaiva and Adhiyajna are to be included among those who will know Him at the time of death.  
