01
Having enshrined the Lord of the universe in my heart,and having made a salutation to the preceptor, I compose this Compendium of all knowable things for the easy comprehension of beginners.
02
There are seven Categories: - Substance, Quality, Action,Generality Particularity, Co-inherence or Intimate relation and Negation. Of these seven categories the class Dravya comprise nine, and nine
03
only:- Earth, Water, Light, Air, Ether, Time, Space, Soul and Mind.
04
There are twenty-four qualities, viz. colour, taste, odor,touch, number, dimension or magnitude, severalty, conjunction or contact, disjunction, priority or propinquity, posteriority or remoteness, weight, fluidity, viscidity, sound, intellect or understanding, pleasure, pain, desire, aversion, effort or volition, merit, demerit and faculty.
05
Motion or Action  is of five kinds only, viz., Tossing or throwing upwards, Dropping or throwing downwards, Contraction, Expansion and Going or Motion in general.
06
Genus or Generality is of two kinds, wider or extensive and narrower or limited.
07
The Individualities or Particularities residing in eternal things are innumerable.
08
Intimate Union is one only.
09
Negation is of four kinds:- Antecedent, Consequent, Absolute, and Reciprocal.
10
Earth is that which has odor. It is of two sorts, eternal and non-eternal. Eternal is atomic, non-eternal is product. It is also threefold, body, organ, object. Body is that like ours; organ is the olfactory sense at the tip of the nose; object comprises the earthy stones and the like.
11
Water is a thing of cold touch. It is of two sorts, eternal and non-eternal. Eternal is atom, non-eternal is the product. It is again threefold, body, organ, and object. Body is the region of Varuna, organ is the sense of taste perceiving savor and residing on the tip of the tongue; masses are rivers, seas etc.
12
Light has hot touch. It is of two sorts, eternal and non-eternal; eternal is atomic, non-eternal is product. It is again threefold, body, organ, and mass. Body is well known in the Solar region, organ is the sight which perceives colour and resides in the forepart of the black pupil of the eye; mass is fourfold, earthly. heavenly, gastric, and mineral. Earthy (mass) is fire and the like; heavenly is lightning etc. produced from watery fuel; gastric causes digestion of things eaten; mineral is gold and the like.
13
Air has  touch without colour. It is of two sorts eternal and non-eternal; eternal is atomic, non-eternal is product. It is again three-fold, body, organ, and mass; body is the aerial world, organ is the sense of touch, apprehending touch and spread over the whole body, mass is the cause of the shaking of trees etc.
14
Aakasa or ether is that which has sound for its (special) quality. It is one, all-pervading and eternal.
15
Time is the ( special and instrumental) cause of the use of (words) past etc. It is one and all pervading.
16
Space is the (special and instrumental) cause of the employment of words East, etc. It is one, all-pervading and eternal.
17
The soul is the substratum of Knowledge. He is of two-fold, Human and Supreme. Of these the Supreme Soul is the all powerful Omniscient God, devoid of pleasure and pain. The Human Soul is different in each body and is all-pervading and eternal.
18
Mind is the organ which is the instrument of the cognition of pleasure etc. Being assigned to each soul it is countless, atomic and eternal.
19 
Colour is the special quality, which is cognized by eye alone. It is of seven kinds, and resides in earth, water and light. All the seven are found in earth, pale white in water, and brilliant white in light.
20
Sour is the quality apprehended by tongue; it is of six kinds: sweet, sour, saline, pungent, astringent and bitter; it resides in
earth and water; earth contains all the six varieties; water only the sweet.
21 
Odor is the quality apprehended by the nose; it is fragrant and non-fragrant, residing in earth only. Touch is the quality apprehended by skin only; it is of three kinds cool, hot, and tepid, residing in earth, water, light and air; of these cool touch is ( found) in water, hot in light and tepid in earth.
23
The four qualities, colour etc. are products of heat and non-eternal in earth; elsewhere they are natural and either eternal or non-eternal. Those inhering in eternal things are eternal; those in non-eternal things are non-eternal.
24
Number is the (special and instrumental) cause of the common usage of (words) one, two etc. It resides in the nine substance from one to Parardha. Oneness is eternal and non-eternal, eternal in eternal substances, and non-eternal in non-eternal. Duality and the rest are only non-eternal everywhere.
25
Dimension is the (special and instrumental) cause of the common usage of measurement. It resides in the nine substances, and is of four kinds: minuteness, largeness, length and shortness.
26
Severalty is the (special and instrumental) cause of the common usage of one thing being different from another.
27
Conjunction is the (special and instrumental) cause of the common usage of calling two things united.
28
Disjunction is the quality which destroys conjunction.
29
Posteriority and priority are the (special and instrumental) causes of the common usage of the words posterior and prior. They reside in the four ( substance), earth, etc. and the mind. They are twofold caused by space and time. The posteriority caused by space is in the remote, and priority so caused is in the near. Posteriority caused by time is in the elder, and priority so caused is in the younger.
30
Gravity is the non-intimate cause of the first fall, and resides in earth and water.
31
Fluidity is the non-intimate cause of the first flow, residing in Earth, water and light. It is twofold, natural and artificial.
32
Viscidity is the quality, which is the cause of the agglutination of powders and resides in water only. Sound is the quality apprehended by the sense of hearing, and resides in ether alone. It is twofold, inarticulate or noises and articulates
or words. The noise is (heard) in drums etc; while words appear in the form of Sanskrit language.
34
Cognition is the cause of all communication or intercourse, and it is Knowledge. It is twofold, remembrance and apprehension. Remembrance is knowledge produced from mental impression alone. Knowledge other than remembrance is apprehension.
35
It is two fold, true and false. The true one is the apprehension of the thing having an attribute as possessing that attribute and it is called Prama; the false one is the apprehension of a thing not having an attribute as possessing that attribute., e.g. knowledge of silver in a conch shell.
36
Right apprehension is divided into four kinds: Percept, Judgement, Analogy and verbal knowledge. The instruments of these are also four namely: Perception, Inference, Comparison and Word or Language.
37
An instrument is a cause which is peculiar.
38
A cause is that which invariably precedes the effect.
39
Effect is the counter-entity of antecedent negation.
40
Cause is of three kinds, 'intimate', 'non-intimate', and 'instrumental' or 'efficient'. The intimate cause is 'that in inseparable union with which the effect is produced', as the threads are of cloth or cloth is of the colour on it. The non-intimate cause is one which is inseparably united in the same object either with the effect or with the ( intimate ) cause, as the conjunction of threads is of the cloth, or the colour of threads is of the colour of cloth. A cause different from both these is an instrumental cause, as the shuttle or the loom.
41
Of the three sorts of causes mentioned in earlier section that alone which is peculiar is karan. Perception is the peculiar cause of perceptive knowledge. Perceptive Knowledge is the knowledge born of the contact of the organ with (External) object. It is two fold undifferentiated and differentiated. Of these, undifferentiated is the knowledge of a thing without its qualities, e.g. 'this is something' . Differentiated is the knowledge of a thing with all its qualities e.g. he is Ditha, he is Brahman,he is black.
43
The contact of organ and object, which is the cause of Perception is of six kinds: 1 Conjunction, 2 Intimate union with the conjoint, 3 Intimate union with the intimately united with the conjunct, 4 intimate union, 5 intimate union with the intimately united, and 6 Connection of the attribute with the subject. Conjunction is the contact producing perception of the jar by the eye. Intimate union with the conjunct is the contact producing the united with the jar which is conjoint with the eye. Intimate union with the intimately united is the contact in perceiving the genus of colour, as colour id intimately united with jar conjoint with eye, and the genus of colour is intimately united therewith. Intimate union is the contact in the perception of word by the organ of hearing, as the organ of hearing is the ether in the cavity of the ear, (since) word is the quality of ether and the quality and the qualified are intimately united. Intimate union with the intimately united is the contact in cognizing the genus word, as the genus is intimately united with word which is intimately united with ( organ of) hearing. The connection of the attribute and subject is the contact in the perception of negation, as negation of jar is an attribute of a place in contact with eye wherever a place is devoid of a jar. The knowledge thus produced from the six fold contact is Percept. Its peculiar cause is the organ. Hence organ is perception.
44
Inference is the peculiar cause of a judgement; judgement is the knowledge that springs from consideration; consideration is the knowledge of reason as distinguished by invariable concomitance, as for instance, the knowledge that this mountain has smoke which invariably accompanied by fire is Consideration, while the knowledge born of it that the mountain is fiery is Judgement. Invariable concomitant thing on object like mountain makes it the characteristic of a Receptacle.
45
Inference is of two kinds:- One's Own and Another's. Of these One's Own is the source of one's own inference; since a man having himself ascertained by frequent observation the generalization, wherever there is smoke there is fire and in a kitchen, approaches a mountain, and suspecting fire thereon and seeing smoke on the mountain, remembers the generalization, wherever there is smoke there is fire. Then the knowledge is produced that mountain has smoke accompanied by fire. This is called consideration. Thence arises the inference viz. the knowledge that mountain is fiery. This is One's Own inference. When however, often inferring fire from smoke oneself, a five membered syllogism is employed to enlighten another person, it is Another's inference: e.g. Mountain is fiery, because it smokes; whatever smokes is fiery, because it smokes; whatever smokes is fiery as a kitchen; this is so; hence this is fiery. By this means even another man apprehends fire from a sign(so) propounded. 
46
The five members are: - 1. Proposition, 2 Reason, 3 Examples, 4 Application and 5 Conclusion. Mountain is fiery, - this is Proposition. Because it has smoke - this is Reason. Whatever smokes etc.- this is example. This is like it- this is Application. Hence it is so- this is Conclusion 
47
Consideration of the sign is alone the cause of both, Judgement for One's Own sake and that for Another's. Hence Consideration is the Inference. 
48
Mark of sign is of three kinds:- 1 positive and negative, 2 purely positive, and 3 purely negative. That which pervades both positively and negatively is positive-negative, as for instance, smokiness when fire is to be proved. "Where there is smoke there is fire as in kitchen" is positive concomitance. "Where there is no fire there is no smoke as in a lake" is negative concomitance. Purely positive is that where there is positive concomitance only, e.g. pot is namable because it is knowable
like cloth. Here there is no negative concomitance of nameability or knowability as all things are knowable and namable. Purely negative is that which has a negative concomitance only, e.g. earth differs from other things because it has smell; that which does not so differ has no smell, as water; this is not like air; and hence it is not so. Here there is no positive instance ( of a thing ) that has smell ( and yet) differs from others, because the whole earth forms the subject.
49
A subject is one where the thing to be proved is doubled as mountain when smokiness is the reason.
50
A similar instance is one where the thing to be proved is ascertained as kitchen in the same case.
51
A contrary instance is that where the absence of the thing to be proved is ascertained, as a lake in the same case. 
52
There are five fallacies viz. 1 Discrepancy 2 Contradiction, 3 Ambiguity, 4 Futility and Falsity.
53
The discrepant reason is one that coexists partially. It is threefold over-wide, peculiar and non-exclusive. One that co-exists with negation of the thing to be proved is over-wide; e.g mountain is fiery because it is knowable, since knowability exists with absence of fire on a lake. Peculiar is that which is not found either in similar or contrary instances; e.g. Sound is eternal because it is Word. The genus word is absent from all eternal and non-eternal things, and resides in Sound only. Non-exclusive is that which has neither similar nor dissimilar instances; e.g. Everything is transitory because it is knowable. Here everything being the subject of inference, there is no separate example.
54
Contrary reason that which is pervaded by the negation of the thing to be proved, e.g. Sound is eternal because it is created. Creatability is covered by the negation of eternity or transitoriness.
55
The ambiguous or in conclusive reason is that wherein there is another reason providing the negation of the thing to be proved; e.g. Sound is eternal, because it is audible like any other sound; and sound is non- eternal, because it is a creation like jar.
56
Futile reason is of three sorts: having non-existent subject, non-existent reason, and non-existent concomitance. Non-existent subject is thus:- Skyey lotus is fragrant because it is a lotus like a lotus in a lake. Here skyey lotus is the subject, but it does not exist at all. A non existing reason is this: Sound is not ocular as it is audible. Non existent concomitance is one which involves a limitation or condition. Condition is that which pervades the thing to be proved, but does not pervade the reason. Pervasion of the thing to be proved means not having absolute negation co-existent with the thing; while non-pervasion of reason means having absolute negation co-existing with the reason. In 'the mountain is smoky because it has
fire' contact with the wet fuel is the condition. For instance wherever there is smoke there is contact of wet fuel. Where there is fire, not necessarily is there contact of wet fuel; e.g. there is no contact of the wet fuel in an iron ball. Thus wet fuel is the condition because it pervades the thing to be proved and does not pervade the reason. Fieriness is a futile reason owing to the condition. 
57
A reason is false where the negation of the thing to be proved is established by another proof, e.g fire is cold as it is substance. Here coldness is the thing to be proved, and its negation is hotness which is cognized by touch-perception. Hence the reason is futile.
58
Comparison is the immediate cause of Analogy. Analogy is the knowledge of the connection of a name with the object denoted by it. The knowledge of similarity is its proximate cause. The recollection of an authoritative direction is the intermediate operation.
59
Word is a sentence spoken by an authority. Authority is a person who speaks truth. Sentence is a group of words, e.g. bring a cow. Word is a thing having power. Power is a convention made by God that a certain sense be understood from a certain word. 
60
Expectancy , compatibility and jurisdiction are the causes of the knowledge of the meaning of a sentence. Expectancy is the inability of a word to convey the meaning of a sentence on account of the absence of some other word. Compatibility is the non-contradiction of the sense. Juxtaposition is the consecutive utterance of words.
61
A sentence devoid og expectancy, etc is un-authoritative; e.g. (the ,words ) cow, horse, man, elephant are not authoritative, being devoid of expectancy, etc. (The sentence) 'Sprinkle with fire is un-authoritative for want of compatibility. 'Bring a cow' pronounced at intervals are not authoritative owing to want of juxtaposition. 
62
A sentence is of two kinds, sacred or profane; the sacred, being pronounced by God, is always trustworthy, while a profane sentence is trustworthy if pronounced by a credible person. Any other is untrustworthy. 
63
Verbal knowledge means the knowledge of the meaning of a sentence; its proximate cause is the Word.
64
Wrong apprehension is of three kinds, doubt, error and false assumption Doubt is the apprehension of various contrary properties in one object e.g. Is it a post or a man? Error is false knowledge, as silver in a conch-shell. False assumption is the deduction of a wider thing by wrong hypothesis of a narrow one, e.g if there be no fire there would be no smoke.
65
Remembrance is also of two kinds; true and false; the one arising from true cognition is true, that arising from false cognition is false.
66
What is experienced by all with agreeable feelings is pleasure.
67
What is experienced by all with disagreeable feelings is pain.
68
Desire is yearning.
69
Aversion is irritation.
70
Action is effort.
71
Merit is the product-enjoined action.
72
Demerit is the product of prohibited actions.
73
The eight qualities, cognition etc are special attributes of soul only.
74
Cognition, desire and effort are of two kinds: eternal and non-eternal; eternal belong to God, non-eternal to human soul.
75
Faculty or Impulse is of three kinds: Velocity, Mental impression and Elasticity.
76
Action consists of motion. That which causes connection with the region upwards is Tossing; that which causes connection with the region downwards is dropping; that which causes connection nearer the body is Pulling or Contraction; that which causes connection with a distant place is Rushing or Expansion. All else is Motion, residing only in the four substance Earth etc. and mind.
77
Action consists of motion. That which causes connection with the region upwards is Tossing; that which causes connection with the region downwards is dropping; that which causes connection nearer the body is Pulling or Contraction; that which causes connection with a distant place is Rushing or Expansion. All else is Motion, residing only in the four substance Earth etc. and mind.
78
Action consists of motion. That which causes connection with the region upwards is Tossing; that which causes connection with the region downwards is dropping; that which causes connection nearer the body is Pulling or Contraction; that which causes connection with a distant place is Rushing or Expansion. All else is Motion, residing only in the four substance Earth etc. and mind. 
79
Action consists of motion. That which causes connection with the region upwards is Tossing; that which causes connection with the region downwards is dropping; that which causes connection nearer the body is Pulling or Contraction; that which causes connection with a distant place is Rushing or Expansion. All else is Motion, residing only in the four substance Earth etc. and mind.
80
Antecedent negation is without a beginning but has an end, and exists before the production of an effect. Destruction has a beginning but no end, and occurs after the production of effect. Absolute negation exists during three time, (past, present and future) and has a counter-entity determined by relation of identity, e.g. a jar is not a piece of cloth. 
81
As All things are included severely in those enumerated, it is proved that there are only seven categories.
81
ІТл ешЯмЬикЬихШкХшЭкЭкЦшЦЬшЫНшНдлЯИлТзшТЯшГзЗшЕшЯиЃ зЬкШшТЃ ъъ
