।। श्रीद्वादशनामपञ्जरस्तोत्रम् ।।

पुरस्तात्केशवः पातु चक्री जाम्बूनदप्रभः ।
पश्चान्नारायणः शङ्खी नीलजीमूतसन्निभः ।। 1 ।।
In the East (in front) may Kesava protect (me) - Kesava,
possessed of the discuss and of the lustre of gold.
In the West (at the back) may Narayana protect (me).
Narayana possessed of the Conch who is like the blue cloud
(in complexion).

इन्दीवरदळश्यामो माधवोर्ध्वं गदाधरः ।
गोविन्दो दक्षिणे पार्श्वे धन्वी चन्द्रप्रभो महान् ।। 2 ।।
Madhava, who is blue like the petal of the blue-lily
(Indeevara flower) and who wields the Mace, may He protect
me from above.
May the great Govinda (protect me) in the Southern side
(in the right), who has the bow and who is of moonlike lustre.

उत्तरे हलभृद्विष्णुः पद्मकिञ्जल्कसन्निभः ।
आग्नेय्यामरविन्दाभो मुसली मधुसूदनः ।। 3 ।।
In the north (may) Vishnu (protect me), - Vishnu, who
wields the Plough (as a weapon) and who is (in hue) like the
filament of a lotus.
In the South-east, the lotus-lustred Madhusoodana, having
the Pestle (for a weapon), may He protect me.

त्रिविक्रमः खड्गपाणिर्निर्ऋत्यां ज्वलनप्रभः ।
वायव्यां वामनो वज्री तरुणादित्यदीप्तिमान् ।। 4 ।।
Trivikrama, who has the Sword in hand and who is of
fire-like brilliance, (may He protect me) in the Southwest.
And in the North-west, Vaamana, possessed of Thunder-bolt
(Vajra) and having the sheen of the youthful Sun, (may He protect me).

ऐशान्यां पुण्डरीकाभः श्रीधरः पट्टसायुधः ।
विद्युत्प्रभो हृषीकेशो ह्यवाच्यां दिशि मुद्गरी ।। 5 ।।
In the Northeast, Sreedhara, who has the splendour of the
lotus and who is armed with a Spear (Pattasa), - (may He protect me).
And Hrisheekesa, who has the effulgence of the lightning and
who has the hammer (for weapon) - (may He protect me in the
direction below).

हृत्पद्मे पद्मनाभो मे सहसार्कसमप्रभः ।
सर्वायुधः सर्वशक्तिः सर्वज्ञः सर्वतोमुखः ।। 6 ।।
Padmanaabha, possessed of a brilliance like that of a
thousand suns, is in my heart-lotus,- Padmanaabha, Who is armed
with all weapons, Who is omni-potent and omni-scient, and Who
can move anywhere without obstruction.

इन्द्रगोपकसङ्काशः पाशहस्तोऽपराजितः ।
स बाह्याभ्यन्तरं देहं व्याप्य दामोदरः स्थितः ।। 7 ।।
The Invincible Damodara, Who is like the crimson
indragopa (insect), and Who is holding a noose in hand, stands
pervading my body inside and outside.

एवं सर्वत्रमच्छिद्रं नामद्वादशपञ्जरम् ।
प्रविष्टोऽहं न मे किञ्चिद्भयमस्ति कदाचन ।। 8 ।।
Thus is the Cage of the Twelve Names (of Vishnu) which
is all-protective and invulnerable. Now that I have entered into it,
there is no longer fear of any kind for me.
There is no longer fear of any kind, I swear, This way my
salutations are to the Lord. 