*601
 वृषभाक्षः The Dharma-axle.
	The protection of the world is done by Him through   Dharma. 
'वृषभ ' signifies Dharma which showers the fruits of actions. 
He is the axle that supports the wheel of Dharma in संसार  and 
showers the fruits in accordance with Dharma.
*602
 वृषप्रियः Dharma-lover.
	Dharma is of  two kinds  Pravruththi and Nivruththi. Pravrithi 
Dharma helps the  Jivas to continue in the world  whereas the 
Nivruththidharma brings about their redemption. Since, both of 
them are dear to भगवान् , He is वृष -priya. The purpose of these 
(Vऍdic) injunctions is only to please Him.  This has been established 
by the Brahma सुत्रा-s as follows. 
	"The fruit proceeds from the परब्रह्मन् . There are appropriate 
reasons for the same."
	द्रमिडाचार्य  also echoes the same idea. "It is only with the 
object of obtaining the fruit that all are  trying to please the 
परमात्म  by means of  Dharma  or virtuous acts. The Sआsthraic 
code also lays down that the acquisition of His pleasure is enough 
for the attainment of the desired fruit."
	Therefore all other schools of thought holding views that 
differ from this are to be disregardedviews which say that the cause 
of the fruit is karma (action) or its latent impression, or power. 
Or  अपूर्व  (a unique substance) or भावन  (psychic effect), or 
Vidhi (Destiny).
*603
 अनिवर्ती 
He who does not turn away (those who are inclined to come back to this 
world.)
	If some are attached  to Pravruththi dharma, भगवान्  does not 
stop them from coming into this world through the path of the Pithrs 
beginning with Smoke.  That is the cause for the continuance of this 
संसार . Vide :
	"Smoke, night, then the dark fortnight, the six months that 
constitute the दक्षिणाय  (the winter solstice)there is a path 
which is characterised by all these. The योगि  who are inclined to 
come back to this world.)
	"When the fruit of the Karma has been enjoyed in the other 
world, he comes back to this world  with the balance of Karma to 
his credit."
	In the above texts and others this has been  well  discussed 
and conclusion arrived at.
*604
 निवृत्तात्मा He Who is the Atma of those who practise Nivritti 
       Dharma.
	He who is the आत्म  of those who practise Nivruththi Dharma.
         निवृत्ता  are those who follow the path of   Nivruththi  
dharma which take them to मोक्ष . भगवान्  is the आत्म of those people 
also. So He is निवृत्तात्म .
*605
 संक्षेप्ता He who limits. 
	It is the nature of भगवान्  to limit the field of  the light of  
knowledge of  those  who practise the Pravruththi-dharma. Vide
"The power, known as the क्षेत्रज्ञन , acquires, on account of its 
being covered by that (Avidya or Karma), all the ever curing  miseries 
(belonging to the circuit of mundane existence), O thou, protector 
of earth."
*606
 क्षेमकृत् He who does what is good. 
	He does what is good for those who follow the Nivruththi 
dharma by removing the obstructions to their knowledge.
*607
 शिवः - The Auspicious. 
	He does what is auspicious for all whether they desire the enjoyment 
of worldly pleasures or whether they seek release. He is Siva.
	"He is the cause of the bondage of worldly existence and also of  
release therefrom."
	"The God rules ever the world of the Pithrs."
	"He is auspicious for those that do auspicious things, and 
inauspicious for those that do inauspicious things."
	Then follow some names that establish this auspicious  nature 
of  भगवान् 
*608
 श्रीवत्सवक्षाः He with the Srivatsa on His chest.
	On His chest He has the श्रीवत्स  (mole) which is the symbol of  His  
good fortune in being the beloved  Consort of  लक्षमी, which fact 
distinguishes  Him from all other  things  that are ruled by  Him. 
He is श्रीवत्सवक्षाः . Vide :--
	"He has श्रीवत्सः  on His chest."
*609
 श्रीवासः The abode of lakshmi.
	"He is ever  with  श्री " What is suggested by this statement 
(in the रामायण ) is declared by this name  श्रीवासः . He is the 
Kalpaka-tree  garden for लक्षमी  where she is ever sporting according 
to Her Pleasure.
*610
 श्रीपतिः The consort of Lakshmi.
	भगवान्   is  the eternally self-chosen and suitable Consort  of  
लक्षमी  as was  सीता  in the case of  राम , Vide :
	"सीता  was the equal of  राम  in nature, age and character."
	"भूमी देवि  and लक्षमी  are thy Consorts."
	"she is the ruler of this Universe and the Consort of विष्णु ."
*611
 श्रीमतां वरः The foremost amongst the Opulent.
	भगवान्  is ever the object of the ardent full and loving glances of 
लक्षमी  whereas Brahma and others are but the object of a casual glance of  
Hers for a moment. Vide :
	"लक्षमी , as she emerged from the Milk-ocean, was bedecked with white 
garlands and garments, and her body was beautified by  all ornaments. 
Even as all the gods where looking with wide open eyes. ढe approached 
विष्णु  and took Her seat on His chest.
	'O मैत्रेय ! When लक्षमी  looked at those gods  from Her seat on 
the chest of Hari, all of them at once experienced immense joy."
	Thus, He is the foremost amongst the opulent.
*612
 श्रीदः The glory -giver.
	भगवान्  gives लक्षमी  the glory of  the supreme love which is eternal, freढ and 
spontaneous श्रीधः . That is to say  He is Her life itself. Her nature is portrayed 
thus by वाल्मीकी  in the words of लक्षमणा 
	"O राम ! Neither can सीता  be without you, nor I. If we are alive 
(without you), it will be just for a moment, even like a pair of   
fish that have been taken out of water."
	"she is ever inseparable from विष्णु ."
	"सीता  cannot be without me even as the lustre cannot be without 
the Sun." (says राम ).
	"Just as radiance cannot be separated from the Sun. I cannot be 
separated from राम "(says सीता ).
*613
 श्रीशः The Lord of Sri. He is the cause of the glory of Lakshmi also.
	भगवान्  is called श्रीशः , because He is the cause of the glory of 
लक्षमी  also. Vide :
	"He is the supreme glory of  Sri  Herself."
	Or He is श्रीशः  because He has श्री as  His ruler. It is  she that 
guides Him in the various acts of His in different  conditions.
	"( लक्षमी is ever with भगवान् ) either as His innate qualities 
in His Transcendental Form, or in a delightful form in His body, or 
as His support by  Her essential nature or  as a devout servant."
	"The ruler of the individual souls, of  Prakruthi and of  the ruler 
Himself" is one of  the well-known names of लक्षमी .
*614
 श्रीनिवासः The comtiguous support of lakshmi.
	He is ever Her support  like the Kalpaka tree  for a celestial 
creeper.
*615
 श्रीनिधिः The abode of Sri.
	लक्षमी has been  placed in भगवान्  like a gem-studded jewel in 
a casket, Hence He is श्रीनिधिः  .
*616
 श्रीविभावनः He who owes His greatness to Lakshmi.
	लक्षमी  is the main cause for the well-known greatness  of  the Lord. 
He is श्री विभावन   since, His greatness is manifested by  Her. So 
it is described by  वाल्मीकि  :
	"That splendour  which is श्री राम is beyond all measure, for 
the daughter of Janaka, सीता  is His."
*617
 श्रीधरः The Bearer of Sri .
	Just as the gem bears  its lustre, the flower its fragrance, the 
moon her moonlight, and the nectar its sweetness. विष्णु  bears लक्षमी  by 
an innate relationship. So He is श्रीधरः .
	"It will be impossible for राम  to abandon  सीता  even as the 
fame of a virtuous man cannot be abandoned by him."
*618
 श्रीकरः He who makes lakshmi follow him
	लक्षमी  remains as a suitable consort to Him in His  Para or  
Transcendental  Aspect. He makes her  incarnate Herself  in a suitable 
form when He comes down into this world in His Incarnations as व्युह  
(Emanations).
	"when He takes a divine body, she also assumes a celestial body."
	"The affix 'tha' comes  after the verb 'krjn (to make) when the 
object is in composition with it denoting cause, habit and agreeableness 
(as in the case of hair in the natural order). 'तीर्थकरः ' (696) and 
other words also come under this rule.
*619 श्रेयः-श्रीमान् - He that Has Lakshmi Who, is resorted to for reaping the good.लक्ष्मी  is called श्रेयः श्री since She has to be resorted to for the attainment of all goals of human endeavour. (श्रेयः =the goal of  human endeavour; 'श्री'=She Who is to be resorted to.) Vide -"Maithili (सीता ), the daughter of Janaka, is surely bent upon showing  Her graciousness to those who make obeisance to Her. O राक्षसी-s!  she is capable of protecting us  from  this danger." (त्रिजटा to the राक्षसी-s )."She bestows bodily  health, wealth, destruction of enemies and happiness.""She is the grantor of the fruit of  release from bondage." "From Whom I shall get gold, cows, horses and sons.""लक्ष्मी , Who is worshipped by the gods (for getting their ends accomplished) or Who is loved by नारायण Himself, and Who is bounteous in Her gifts."Such  indeed are the Scriptural  Texts about लक्ष्मी .      *620 लोकत्रयाश्रयः He Who is the Resort for all the three worlds.
He like a father is the one resort of all beings along with लक्ष्मी   Who is the mother of the world. Vide :"Thou  art  the Mother of all the worlds,  and Hari, the God of all gods, is the father."*621 स्वक्षः The beutiful eyed. He is possessed of celestial organs likeeyes which are thoroughly proficient in the art of the enjoyment ofthe nectarine ocean of Her beauty.*622 स्वङ्गः The lovely-bodied. He has a celestial  body  which is  fascinating  even to लक्ष्मी .*623
 शतानन्दो He with a Bliss that is hundred fold. He has boundless
       Bliss which is ever flowng on account of their mutual love.
	He has boundless  Bliss  which is  ever  flowing  on  account of  
their mutual love.
*624
 नन्दिः He who is delighted.
He is Nandi since  He is delighted by being  ever  prosperous  by 
 virtue of  His being with  Her at all times,  at  all  places and in 
all  ways).
	"The affix  'in'  is added  to all verbs."  (Nand+in=Nandi).
*625
 र्ज्योतिर्गणेश्वरः The Lord of the hosts of lustrous deities.
	He is  Jyothir-गणेश्वर  because  He  is being served always  by  
hosts of  eternal servitors  like शेष  and शेषासन  who are agreeable 
to both of  them and who are  themselves  lustrous.  Here the word 
'ज्योतिः ' signifies the retinue of  नित्य सूरी-s  who are ever-effulgent  
by nature. Vide :
	"Wise men desire to attain the world of the radiant  souls."
	"Where  the ancient साध्य  देवा  reside."
	शेष  आदिशेष ; शेषासन विश्वक्सेन , the Lord's Commander-in-chief, 
'who takes in only that which remains after having been offered to the 
Lord  first. These are all known as  नित्य सूरी .
	Thus far the supreme nature of  भगवान्  to its highest extent 
has been portrayed. Now we proceed to delineate the quality of  
amiability of   भगवान्  to its farthest limit. This in fact is 
considered a topic of greatest secrecy.
*626
 विजितात्मा He whose mind has been conquered.
 भगवान्  has a mind which is self-willed and delectable that is 
fascinating even to लक्षमी . But He is easily won over and becomes 
favourably disposed towards those who bow before Him. So He is विजितात्मा  
possessed of a mind that has been conquered by His devotees.
*627
 विधेयात्मा He who is of submissive nature.
	It is His essential nature to be at the disposal of  His  devotees 
to such an extent that He can easily be commanded by them to do whatever 
they want "Come hither; stand here; sit here; eat this." Therefore He is 
विधेयात्मा .
*628
 सत्कीर्तिः He of true renown.
He is Sath कीर्ति , because He has a great and pure reputation for 
being so amiable and affable by nature. It would be quite correct to 
make a statement as follows with reference to His nature. 'Whatever is 
said of  भगवान्  in His praise does exist in  Him. But it does not mean 
that  all  that exists in Him is only that much and not more; or more 
has been said than what actually exists in Him.' Vide :
	"कृष्ण  is described by all wise men as the Supreme Lord of all 
lords in the world. But what they have said is only a small part of  
His greatness. How can it be called as praise or  hyperbole when one 
states  what  actually  exists in Him?".
	"O हृषीकेश ! (The Lord of all इन्द्रिय-s, श्री कृष्ण !) It is quite 
appropriate that the world is delighted by Thy fame, and becomes drawn 
towards Thee".
*629
 छिन्नसंशयः  The Dispeller of all doubts;
	As  He  has the great reputation of  being endowed with  qualities 
like amiability and affability, all doubts about Him stand dispelleddoubts,
 if  He can  be easily  known or is  difficult  to be known, if He can be 
easily pleased or is difficult to be pleased, and if  He is easily 
accessible or difficult to approach. Thus  He is Chinna samsaya.
	"(Worship) Him who bestows clearness to the mind of the soul."
	"There is no one else who can clear this doubt (from my mind)'
(says Arjuna to कृष्ण .)
*630
 उदीर्णः He who is clearly manifest.
	How (does He clear the doubts)? He has a pleasing and splendid 
form which is the object of direct perception to the eyes of  persons. 
So He is उदीर्णः
*631
 सर्वतश्चक्षुः He who is visible to the eyes of all.
	He is सर्वतs-चक्षुः , because the eyes of even ordinary people 
like ourselves can perceive Him (when He incarnates Himself as राम  and 
कृष्ण  or as idols in temples or in our houses.) Therefore, it is certain 
that all doubts about Him are dispelled. Surely there cannot be any 
doubt about an object that is directly and clearly seen.
*632
 अनीशः He who is not the Master
With reference to those who are exclusively  devoted  to Him, 
He does not asset  His rulership. He is completely  in the hands of  
His devotees  in regard to  all things  that pertain to Him, like 
bathing, decoration, association with others etc. So He is अनीशः .
*633
 शाश्वत-स्स्थिरः He Who is eternally existent. 
	He assumes the various forms of  the images which continue to exist 
for ever and which are directly perceptible to the eyes, at all times.
	Vide the शातवात संहित l  :
	"He assumes a form similar to that of the image (fashioned by us), 
enters into it and remains there."
*634
 भूशयः He who lies on the ground. 
	When His devotees pray to Him and invoke only  His presence in this 
World. He comes and continues to remain in places chosen and indicated by 
them which go by the names of  Svayam-vyaktha, Siddha, मानुष  etc. He 
takes a  pleasure even in  lying down in  those places in order to 
bless them. So He is भूसयः .
	(Swayam-vyakthaPlaces where the Lord has chosen to manifest 
Himself. Siddha are places where the Images of the Lord have been 
consecrated and  installed by Siddhas or perfected beings. मानुष  
are places where the Lord is installed by ordinary human beings).
*635
 भूषणः He Who becomes adorned.
	By  this good  disposition of   His  which is beneficial to all  
He, the Consort of  लक्षमी , becomes adorned भूषण . It does not bring  
discredit  to the affluent if  they  visit  the  houses of  those who 
are destitute as  their guest, partake of  the food they eat, and share 
their joys and  sorrows  along with them. On  the contrary, it only 
sets off  their  greatness and adorns them as an ornament.
	"The affix 'yuch' is employed after the verbs having the sense 
of 'krudh' (to be angry), 'mand' (to adorn) etc.
*636
  भूतिः He Who is wealth.
	He is भूतिः , really the all-round wealth for those who are devoid 
of all other means, external and internal. That  is to say, He is their 
wealth in every wayॷlike loving sons, milk-yielding cows and kind-hearted  
friends.
*637
 भूतिः He who is wealth.
	He is भीति i, really the all-round wealth for those who are devoid 
of all other means, external and internal. That  is to say, He is their 
wealth in every waylike loving sons, milk-yielding cows and kind-hearted  
friends.
*638
 अशोकः He who is without sorrow. There is no reason for Him to feel 
       sorrowful since He never abandons any one who is destitute.
There is no reason for Him to feel sorrowful since He never abandons 
any one who is a destitute.
	'विशोकः ' is another reading and the meaning is the same.
*639
 शोकनाशनः The sorrow distroyer. He destroys the sorrow of the people
       resulting from the loss of contact with Him.
	The Sorrow of the people resulting from the loss of contact with Him.
	"I have heard  from great men like you that He who has realised the 
आतमन्  crosses the ocean of sorrow. O Sir! I am sorrowful. I request you 
to be pleased to help me cross this ocean of sorrow."
	"They are in grief who know how difficult it is to have a vision of  
God Who is their greatest relative".
. अर्चिष्मान् He who has great lustre.
	Though, His greatness is a secret (to others). He has a celestial 
splendour that opens the eyes, both external and internal, of  His devotees. He is अर्चिष्मान्  .
*640
 अर्चितः He who is worshipped.
	व्यास    next proceeds  to state that all that has been stated above 
with reference to superior qualities of  भगवान्  is quite possible and 
stands to reason. He is Archithah.
	Archa is the incarnation of  भगवान्  in images and Architha 
signifies He has that form. This incarnation of  भगवान्  in images 
or icons is not in a far off place like the पर-रूप , (the Transcendental 
form of भगवान् ). Nor is it limited to a particular place or time like 
His incanations as a god (उपेन्द्र  for example) or a human being (as राम ), 
all of  which are known as विभवा-अवतार . But it is perceptible in holy 
places, temples and houses at all times. The mysterious truth about it can 
be learnt from the Bhagavath शास्त्रा-s (also known as पञ्चरात्र आगमा-s), 
बोधायन  Smruthi, वैष्णव पुराण and other scriptural Texts. Vide : in 
वैष्णव धर्म 
	"After having shapped a beautiful image of विष्णु  with a lovely face 
and lovely eyes out of gold silver and the like in a manner that would be 
pleasing, one should worship it, do sacrifice to it and mediatate on it. 
By doing so one would enter into that  form which is none other than  
Brahman itself and will  have all one's  sins dispelled."
*641
 कुम्भः He who is an object of desire.
	He is desired by all (Kumbhah) because of  His beauty which is 
similar to the beauty with which they are familiar in this world.
	"The substitute 'kum' comes in the place of the root 'kamu' 
(to desire) and the affix 'bha' is also added.
	Kamu+kum (kamu=kum+bha=kumbha).
	Or भगवान्  is called Kumbha because He shines (भा ) in this world 
(kum). By His immense power He drives away all fear from the servants 
of Yama and the like; The Lord shines in this worldKumbha, the world 
which is marked by he presence of only shrines and temples, where the 
utmost that can be done by a person is only meditation and worship and 
the contact for a human being with which is limited by birth and death.
	The word 'kumbha' is treated as correct and comes under the 
'प्रिषोदरादि ' rule.	
	The boundary, the extent and the like of the holy shrines have 
been described in the पौष्कर -भाग  as follows :
	"A holy shrine sanctifies that part of the earth around it even 
as it does its own place. Such is the greatness of the shrine."
	"The sanctity of a holy shrine extends up to that part of the 
land  where the echo of  the sound of the conch blown from the temple 
of a god is heard".
	"The embodied souls who wish to attain the fruits in this world 
and the other, and who strive to attain them, 'the fruits in the 
form of  the eight  Siddhis like अणिम , attain them if  they live 
in the sacred shrines."
	"The Lord is present in all places in the highways and by ways 
so that all beings who live on this earth may attain salvation (if by 
chance they happen to tread on those paths)."
	"When a man, living in a holy shrine, gives up his life praying 
to God in the last moments 'O Lord जनार्दन ; Save me' and lies 
surrounded by his wife and children, the attendants of  the Lord 
of that holy shrine at once come there and first drive away by  force 
the frightening servants of  the Lord of death (Yama). Then with the 
blowing of conchs and beating of  drums, they mount the body on a 
splendid chariot and take it to the presence of the Lord and submit. 
'O Lord! In this holy shrine of Thine this person has given up his 
mortal body composed of  the five elements. Now he is a destitute. 
Please do according  to his desert. Then the Lord on hearing the 
words of  his attendants, turns  His eyes full of mercy on that 
person to bless him."
	As  stated above, in the case of  those who have given up their 
bodies in a holy shrine, the Lord of the  shrine, Himself purifies them 
or through His servants. According to their Karma they attain god even  
in that birth itself or after a series of virtuous births. This is the
teaching of the Scriptures.
*642
 विशुद्धात्मा He of a pure natur. 
	In this way भगवान्  sacrifices all that He has on the devotees who 
have resorted to Him. He is called  विशुद्धात्मा .
*643
 विशोधनः The Purifier. 
	He purifes those who give up their body in a holy shrine and who are 
fit to attain Him.
*644
 अनिरुद्धः Anuruddha.
	"Aniruddha, the Lord of the world, is ever present  with  the name 
of  जनार्दन  in that part of the Earth called  Vasubhanda."
*645
 अप्रतिरथः  The matchless.
	His name is जनार्दन , which means the Tormentor of the people. 
In accordance  with that name. When He begins to torment those who are 
wicked by nature, no one can prevent Him. So He is अप्रतिरथः .
*646
 प्रद्युम्नः The Illuminator
	He is Pradyumna since He makes the individual souls effulgent.
	"The Illuminator" -- say the Maulas.
	"Pradyumna is Purushothtama, the Supreme पुरुष ."
	"Presiding over all things, He Himself resides here and bestows 
the supreme goal to His devotees."
*647
 अमितविक्रमः He of immesurable steps.
	In His Incarnation as Thrivikrams, all  the  three worlds were no 
match for His three steps. So He is Thrivikrama.
	"O Brahma, the Lotus-born! The God of gods, Thrivikrama,  has 
stationed  Himself in the waters of the यमुना , and bestows  the 
supreme goal to all men."
*648
 कालनेमिनिहा The destroyer of the wheel of ignorance of Time
	The destroyer of the wheel of  ignorance of  Time.
	Paramँthma lives in these places and  removes the blemiढes of  
Kali-yuga.  So He is  कालनेमिनिहा  .
	"Avidya (ignorance), by name, is an irresistible felly of  the 
wheel of  Time; when it comes to me, it loses its form."
	"One should meditate on the Lord as the Destroyer of  the spread 
of  ignorance." This is how the meditation on the Lord कालनेमिनिहा  
has been laid down.
*649
 शौरिः The son of soora. ie Vasudeva
"With the name of  Sauri the Lord lives in the country  
उत्पलावर्तक ,  by name." Therefore His name is Sauri.
He is called Sauri, because He is the son of Su:ra (which 
is another name for वासुदेव ).
*650
 शूरः The valiant. 
	शूरः  is राम as stated in the following text:
	"The great राम , Who has broad lotus-like eyes and Who brought 
about the destruction of the राक्षसा-s, lives on the चित्रकूट  
Mountain."
	The word 'Su:ra' is derived  form the root 'su' (to go). 
"The affix 'kran' comes after the roots 'su', 'si', 'chi' and 'mi."
 and the root of the vowel is lengthened." (Su+ra=su:ra).
*651
 शूरजनेश्वरः The Ruler of all valiant men.
	He is again specified by another name  शूर जनेश्वर  
(The commander of the brave).
*652
 त्रिलोकात्मा He who evenr moves about in the three worlds.
	"O Brahmin! जनार्दन , the God of all gods, has resorted to the 
mountain महाभोध  in the Magadha Kingdom and remains there with the 
name of  लोकनाथ ."
	He is  त्रिलोकात्मा  since,  He is always going about the three 
worlds  in order to bless  His devotees.
	"The word  'आत्म '  is derived from the root  'atha' (to be 
always moving about). "The affix 'मणिन् ' come after the roots  'so'  
and  'ath'." The 'मणिन् ' affix has been added here.
*653
 त्रिलोकेशः The Ruler of the three worlds.
	"The Lord came from His own abode to a holy  place in the city 
of  प्रग-ज्योतिष , and remained there with the name of  Visvऍsvara." 
So He is त्रिलोकेश.
*654
 केशवः The distress Dispeller.
	"O ब्राह्मिण् केशव , Who is the destroyer of  all distress in the world, remains 
in  two forms in two places-in the holy place named  Matthura and in वराणसि ."
	The word 'केशव ' is etymolgized in the following way also
	"Ka is the name of  Brahma and I am ईश   who rules over all the 
embodied beings. Both of  us have been born out of  Thy body and 
therefore Thou art  known  by the  name of  केशव ." (words of  
Siva to भगवान् .)"
*655
 केशिहा The slayer of Kesi the Asura.
	Sage व्यास  has himself given another interpretation to this 
name elsewhere " केशव , the slayer of केशि ."
*656
 हरिः The Green-hued.
	The name Hari is explained thus:
	"The great Lord of  the Universe, lives in a place of worship in the
 गोवर्धन  Hill with  the name of  Hari."
	"Being invoked in  sacrifices,  I aceept  the  oblations  
offered  to  Me  and  therefore I am called 'Hari'.  That  superior  
colour of  Mine is  green-and  therefore, I am called Hari. (Hara=green.)
*657
 कामदेवः The desire-grantor.
	'The Lord has the name  काम-देव  as  He grants  all  the desires of 
 all beings. He is on  the हिमालय  in the place of  Sankara where He 
is worshipped by the अप्सरा-s (Divine damsels).'
The word 'देव' is derived  from the verb 'देव्याति'  from 
the root "div" signifying the act of gift."
*658
 कामपालः  The protector of the gifts.
	(He not only gives but also) protects what  has  been given.  
So He is  कामपालः .
*659
 कामी He who has desirable things.
	He is कामी , because  He has in His possession  all  things  
in abundance to be given to others.
*660
 कान्तः He who is charming.
	By  Himself  He is fascinating-कान्तः  So  He is worshipped  by  
the  अप्सरा-s.
	In this way  the connection  of  the Lord  with the various holy 
shrines may be inferred from the suggestions explicit or implicit in the 
names.
	Incarnation as  the Lord of  Sakthi
	Next begins the description of  भगवान्  as the Lord of  Sakthi.
*661
 कृतागमः The propounder of the Agamas.
	He reveals to the pure-minded the Scriptural texts containing  
different  kinds  of  मन्त्रा-s.
*662
 अनिर्देश्यवपुः He of indefinable bodies.
	He is अनिर्देश्यवपुः  since, He assumes different kinds of bodies 
for the purpose of  blessing the beings according to the nature of  
the qualities of  the particular Yuga in which they are.
	"He  has a lustre which is quite suitable to the nature of  
the Yuga,"
*663
 विष्णुः The Pervader.
	He is विष्णु since He enters into the Universe by virtue of  His power of  
pervasion, rulership etc.
	"He, Who is the embodiment of all powers" -is the Manthra bout  Him.
	In the Adithya-पुराणा it is said:
	"Since the entire Universe is pervaded by the Supreme Deity, He is 
known as  विष्णु . The name ' विष्णु ' is derived from the root 'vis' (to enter 
into)."
	In the उद्योग  (parva in महाभारत )-
	"The Lord gets the name ' विष्णु ', because  He measured  the three 
worlds with  His steps."
*664
 वीरः The valiant.
	"He destroys  at  once those who are source of  suffering  to  
the  pious by  discharging  the two weapons Gada and Chakra which are 
ever ready to carry out  His commands."
	So He is वीर , the valiant.
*665
 अनन्तः The Limitless.
	He is Anantha since He is not limited by space, time or object. 
His Manthra says-
	"Unto Him of unbounded form."
	"There is no end to a description in detail of  the objects (which 
I control)."
	"There is no end to this object  known as  Brahman."
	"Brahman is Existence, Knowledge and infinite."
	All these signify that it is the nature of भगावन्  to act at all  
times, in all places and in all ways. The fact of  His not baing 
conditioned by objects does not  mean that there is complete  
identity between the object and Himself, For then it will lead 
to the unwelcome conclusion that space and time also will become 
identical with Him and that they have no separate existence. It  
is  not  to  you liking.
*666
 धनंजयः He who surpasses wealth
	That  He is boundless is established  with reference to  His qualities 
and possessions. Dhananjaya-He excels all wealth like gold diamond ect., 
because of  His  great superiority. He is longed  for  eagerly by all. 
All make great efforts  to acquire Him, and keep Him secure. Above all  
He is the means for their redemption.
	"The affix 'khach' comes after the following roots when the words 
to be formed denote a name 'bhr', 'tr', 'vr', 'ji' 'dhari', 'sahi' 'thapi' 
and 'dama'." 
*667
 ब्रह्मण्यः He who is beneficial to brahman.
He Who is beneficial to Brahman (i.e. the sentient beings and the 
non-sentient objects).
	Here the word 'Brahman' is used to signify things that are big. 
In several place  जावात्मा also is referred  to as Brahman, because 
his acts are great and his knowledge is  profound.  His enjoyment of 
all objects in  this  world and in the other is also great.
	"That (individual soul) whose essential  nature is knowledge, 
is called Brahman."
	"The Brahman (the individual soul) when unsullied (i.e. free from 
contact with the Prakruthi) is the same everywhere."
	The Avyaktha (or Prakruthi) is also called Brahman (big)., When 
it is enjoyed by the individual soul, it transforms itself into infinite 
objects of enjoyment. Vide
	"The womb (from which the Universe is born) is the great  Brahman 
(i.e. prakruthi). It also belongs to Me."
	Since भगवान्  is the cause for the existence and enjoyment of  
these two (prakruthi and पुरुष ), He is benificial  to them. Hence His 
name ब्राह्मण्या .
*668
 ब्रह्मकृद्ब्रह्मा He who controls Brahma, the creator of big things
	He Who controls Brahma, the creator of  big  things.
	Mahath, अहन्कार  and  other  things which are the effects of  
prakruthi, are also big: because they expand  themselves as big things 
in the world. So they also are called Brahman (big). Vide
	"From Him (the Supreme Brahman) proceeds  this  undifferentiated 
creation (Brahman) as  also the world of matter and soul (anna) 
characterised by the distinguishing marks of  name and form."
	This world is brahma (big): the four-faced Brahma is  the 
creator of  this  world (brahma-kruth); this Brahma is always 
controlled by परमात्मा , Whose name therefore is Bramha-kruth-Brahma.
*669
 ब्रह्म The Supreme Brahman, Paramatma.
	Thus परमात्म expands  the  non-sentient matter  as  gross and 
subtle, and expands the souls as aggregate and separate. He also is 
 big  with the hosts of  unsurpassed and auspicious qualities, and 
big by His essential nature and by the glory of  His possessions. 
Therefore  He  is  Brahman,  He does not look for any external  help  
to do anything and is to be learnt only from a study of  the Upanishads.
	"He is called Brahman, because He is Himself  big and He makes 
others also big."
	"The affix 'मणिन्' comes after the root 'brmh' (to increase) 
and the nasal  is replaced by 'a'."
*670
 ब्रह्मविवर्धनः He who makes the Dharma grow.
	He who makes the Dharma grow.
	The word 'Brahma' here signifies 'Thapas' which includes in itself  
Dharma. Dharma is the cause of all  this, and that Dharma  also is Brahman.
He makes that Dharma also grow. So He is Bramha-vivardhanah.
	"Thapo Brahma" is the Sruthi text.
*671
 ब्रह्मवित् The knower of the Vedas.
	The वेदास्   that reveal  Him are called Brahma.  A वेदिc  text  
reads: "We (the students) are going to study  Brahma,  (i.e.the Vऍdँs)."
	"भगवान्  are indeed endless." भगवान्  knows the ultimate limit of 
 those वादास्  also. So He is Brahma vith. Vide
	"Brahma (i.e. the Veda) is  both  beginningless and endless. 
Neither the gods, nor the sages know that वेदा . That one great Creator  
भगवान् नारायण   alone  knows  it  by  Himself."
*672
 ब्राह्मणः The Instructor of the Vedas.
	परमात्मा is called  ब्राह्ममण, because he takes birth in the 
Athri-gओthra and others as a Brahmin in the form of दत्तात्रेय  and 
others in order to establish the teachings of the वेदाs in this world.
	Or according to the Ethymologists,  ब्राह्ममण  is one who guides or 
recites the वेद ."
*673
 ब्रह्मी He who has Brahma as His possession.
	All these things in the form of  प्रमेय and प्रमाण  known as  Brahma,
 are His possessions. (प्रमाण  is the वेद  the means of knowledge and 
प्रमेय  is the objects of knowledge viz. Prakruthi, पुरुष ,ईश्वर  (etc.)
	"Hari is the embodiment of all these things which go by the name of  
Brahma."
*674
 ब्रह्मज्ञ The knower of the Vedas.
	He cognises directly the वेदा-s  and  their meanings as well.  
So he is  Brahma-jnah.
	"I alone am the  knower of the वेदा-s."
*675
 ब्राह्मणप्रियः He who has the Brahmins as His favourites.
	He Who has the Brahmins as His  favourites. Vide
	"Though the Brahmin beats a person, curses him, utters harढ words 
to him, he who does not bow to him (the Brahmin) unlike Me Who bowed 
(to Bhrugu)-(he is a sinner). He will be consumed by the wild fire 
of the Brahmin's anger. He deserves to be killed and punished. He is 
not Mine."
	"But those devotees who adopt this nectar of virtuous conduct as 
taught above (i.e. follow the Karma योग ), who are full of faith, and 
who hold Me as the Highest Deity, they are exceedingly dear to Me.)"
	"I vanquish the असुरा-s only by the favour of the Brahmins,"
	"How much more easily then the Brahmins (and the royal sages) will 
reach the supreme goal (who are of meritorious births and who are my 
devotees)!"
	The unlimited nature of भगवान्  in diverse ways has been revealed 
by the following  scriptural texts:
	"( भगवान् ) is greater than the great."
	"Higher than the high and greater than the great."
	"He is far greater than the great." And so on.
*676
 महाक्रमः He who provdes steps for the elevation of others.
Next the unlimited nature of  His affection towards those, in whom an 
eagerness to attain Him has been created, is going to be dealt with.
महाकर्मः - He who provides steps for the elevation of  others.
परमात्मा is very  high and the जीवा-s are far below in the 
Nether-world of  Samsara. In order to raise them up, He provides 
a gradually ascending series of great steps. So He is called महाकर्मः . 
This is like the action of the mother who first feeds the infant with her 
breast-milk, then with cow's milk and then gives the child solid food 
and finally luxurious food. Similarly in order to redeem a virtuous person, 
भगवान्  raises him step by step and makes him act up to His will.
	At first he removes from his mind the hatred against  Him; then 
He makes him believe Him and His injunctions; next He draws the mind 
of man towards him.
*677
 महाकर्मा He of great actions. 
	Extremely surprising and great are  His acts. He makes a creature 
which, in its birth as a worm of germ, is so small like a drop of  the 
leavings left by a person, become endowed with the enjoyment of His 
great glory.
*678
 महातेजा He of great Resplendence.
He has an effulgence which destroys the darkness of the beginningless 
ignorance of those who are तमसिक्  by nature.
*679
 महोरगः He who is great and enters into the heart.
	How can He who is so very great come near these beings which are 
small like a particle of dust? Like the material objects of pleasure, 
He also gets into them through their external sense organs and then 
enters into their heart. Here the word 'uras' which means chest 
signifies the heart. Thus he reaches them through their hearts.
*680
 महाक्रतुः The great God who has the easiest means of worship.
	"Who will not endeavour to please that God Who cannot be pleased 
by wealth or riches, and clothes or ornaments, but Who will be pleased 
by the sincere heart ?"
	As stated in the text there is a grand, but easy way of worढipping 
Him. So He is महाक्रतुः . He is to be worshipped by all acts which have
 been prescribed by the आगम शास्त्र  (i.e.पञ्चतन्त्र शास्त्रा-s). All 
things become sanctified and sweet by being offered to भगवान्. 
((श्री कृष्ण  says in the गीता )-
	"Whatever you do, (whatever you eat, whatever is offered in fire, 
whatever you give by way of charity, and whatever penance you do, 
O Arjuna, make all that as an offering to Me.)"
*681
 र्महायज्वा He with worshippers of a superior nature.
	He is र्महायज्वा , because He has worshippers who are far superior 
to these who are worshipping others. Vide-
	"Amongst the hosts of worshippers (in this world), those who are 
exclusively devoted to Him are the best. They never worship other gods."
*682
 महायज्ञः He whose worship is the greatest.
	The sacrifice with its eight accessories like respectful approach, 
offering of sweet things, mixture of honey etc., Is superior to all other 
kinds of sacrifices. So He is महा यज्ञ. Vide
	"Among all धर्मा-s, that Dharma which comprises the adoration of
 विष्णु  is the highest, for He protects His devotees as if they were His 
own body," 
	"The rites performed by wise men who have supreme and exclusive 
devotion to भगवान्  are received by Him with great joy with His head."
	"How wonderful I भगवान्   pleases all those who have exclusive 
devotion to Him. He receives with His own head the worship which they 
do  in accordance with the injunctions of  the शास्त्रा-s."
*683
 महाहविः He who is worshipped with supreme oblations.
	"There was no killing of any animal."
	"There were only recitations of  the Hymns sung  in  the  
अरण्यक  portion of the वेदा-s."
	(अरण्यक  is a class of  religious and philosophical writings 
(connected with the ब्राह्मणा-s) which are either composed in a forest 
or must be studied there.)
	In this way the offerings to Him involve no cruelty to animals. 
They are सात्विक  and are based on the Upanishads. Vide-
	"The oblation of the Brahman which has the Brahman for its 
instrument (is offered into the fire of the Brahman by the ब्राह्मण 
(jivathma.) By him who meditates on the Brahman as (the soul of) 
work, Brahman alone is to be attained.)"
	"(And others) offering in addition the sacrifice of knowledge 
(worship Me as one-(Me), who, marked by diversity in various ways, 
am multiform)."
	"Being what I am,  I worढip Him and do not go against Him whose 
property I am."
	"I make this sacrifice of myself to the Supreme in the effulgent 
Sun who is the cause of my attaining release (from samsara)."
	"I myself offer my own self in the fire."
	Or it may be taken that all these texts refer to the submission 
of the pure soul (आतमा ) as an offering in a sacrifice.
	"It was felt by Uparicharvasu, an exclusive and singleminded 
devotee that his soul, kingdom, wealth wife and vehicles were all 
for भगवान् ."
	This fact is revealed by this text also "The sacrifice of 
knowledge is superior, O slayer of  foes, to the sacrifice of 
material objects."
*684
 स्तव्यः He who is worthy of praise. 
The affix 'yath' is added to the root 'sthu' (to praise) in the sense 
of 'he deserves praise.' भगवान्  alone deserves praise since, 
He is endowed with highly auspicious qualities which are eternal 
boundless and flawless. He alone is renowned as the Lord of the 
Thousand Names and His praise alone is not vain flattery. Other 
gods etc. are not fit to be praised as their qualities are quite 
contrary to the above.
	In the  बार्हस्पत्य स्मृति  it is stated:
	"A person praises a rich man with great fervour on account 
of a desire for money. Who will not be released from bondage if 
he praises the Creator of the Universe in that way?"
	"These are the thousand names of the reputed  Lord Who 
deserves to be praised with them."
*685
 स्तवप्रियः He  who relishes praise.
	He is Sthava priya since, He is pleased with anything that is said with the idea 
of extolling His qualities. It may be done by any person in whatever way and whatever 
language. It may glorify Him or ever denigrate Him. The story of घण्टाकर्ण is a striking 
example for this quality of the Lord.
	(घण्टाकर्ण -He was one of the attendants of  Siva and was such a great devotee that 
he did not like to hear the names of  विष्णु and other gods, even spoken  casually 
by others. Lest they should fall in his ears, he suspended two bells from his ears 
and whenever a person began to speak of विष्णु , he would shake his head violently 
so that the ringing of the bells would deafen him. In his eagerness to avoid hearing 
he was keenly observing if any one spoke that name and this, in fact, ended only 
in his thinking of that god always, though without devotion. It is said that this 
constant thinking of विष्णु  earned for him salvation.
*686
 स्तोत्रं The Eulogy incarnate. The praise of him is 
accomplished by himself as an instrument when He is pleased with the singer.
	This praise of Him is accomplished by Himself as an instrument when 
He is pleased with the singer. This is seen in the praise of  भगवान्  
by  Dhruva.
	(The young child Dhruva was doing severe penance in order to 
realise the Lord. When the Lord appeared before him, the child was 
struck dumb with emotion and could not utter a word. The Lord with 
love touched the cheek of the child with His conch. The next moment 
words of praise began to flow from ध्रुवा 's mouth.)
	"The affix 'ष्ट्रन् ' comes with the sense of the instrument after 
the roots 'दाम् ', 'ni', 'yu', 'yuj', 'sthu', 'thuda', 'si', 'sicha', 
'miha', 'patha', 'dasa' and nah'."
*687
 स्तुतः He who is praised.
	He is Sthutha-He is being praised for the attainment of their 
respective desires by the innumerable Free Angets (नित्य-शूरीs) 
like the Thousand-hooded आदिशेष . Garuda who is the embodiment of the 
three-fold वेदाs, by Brahma and other gods in this world and also by 
human beings like ourselves-by one and all without any distinction. 
Vide
	"Whose exploits which are wonderful and beneficial are always 
extolled by all the chief gods (in the Heaven), and the kings of all 
kings on earth."
	"At first Brahma the creator praised Him, then Indra of great 
knowledge extolled Him, and then the four directions." Here the phrase 
'four directions' indicates that He is the object of praise by all 
beings like ourselves.
*688
 स्तोता He who praises those who extol Him. 
	It is the nature of परमात्म  to praise those that praise Him. Vide.
	"He who praises भगवान्  is praised by भगवान्  Himself, and he 
who adores भगवान्  becomes an object of adoration for Him."
This can be seen in the episode of the Journey to Kailasa.
*689
 रणप्रियः The lover of fight. 
	His celestial and lovable exploits are eulogised in the Scriptures 
like श्रीमद् रामायण ,महाभारत  etc. fighting and other such acts 
of His are done for pleasing His friends. रणप्रिय , Vide
	"श्री राम killed रावण  in the fight and being happy, fulfilled 
the desires of the powerful सुग्रीव  and अंगद ."
*690
 पूर्णः He who is ful.
	It is easy to please Him by words of praise alone even without 
any expense, great physical strain, or elaborate worship. Why? 
Because he is पूर्णः -full by Himself. He has all His desires 
realised (and nothing to be longed for). 
*691
 पूरयिता The fulfiller of desires of others.
	If He is Himself  full, then why does He expect the praise etc. 
as though He is in want of something? It is only to satisfy the desire 
of others to praise Him that He allows them to do it. So He is पूरयिता , 
the Fulfiller of their desires.
*692
 पुण्यः  The Purifier. 
	He purifies even the worst sinners and thus makes them fit for 
extolling Him. He is पुण्यः .
	"The affix 'yath' comes after the root 'pu:' (to purify), and 
also the augment 'nuk'. The lng vowel 'u:' of 'pu:' is shortened."
*693
 पुण्यकीर्तिः He, the singing of whose glory also is purifying.
	"Maithrऍya ! Just as fire purifies the metals, the unequalled 
recitation of the names of भगवान्  which have unsurpassed greatness 
destroys all the sins of men."
	"They who, without being aware of it, pronounce the name of 
भगवान् , are freed from all sins in the same way as a deer is freed 
ffrom the attacks of the beasts of prey which (beasts) become frightened 
on hearing a lion's roar (and run away leaving the deer)."
	"A man in Kali Yuga attains by the mere mention of the names of 
भगवान्  everything-whatever fruit a man obtained in Krutha yuga by 
renunciation (त्याग ), whatever fruit a man obtained in the द्वापर  
yuga by the performance of sacrifices and whatever fruit a man 
obtained in the त्रेता युग  by worshipping the Lord."
	It is because of this greatness that it is revealed by the वेद  
itself that the Hymns in His praise (and those who sing them) 
purify rows of persons who come into contact with them.
	(पंक्ति-पावन  -An eminent person, especially a respectable 
ब्राह्मण , who being very learned, always gets the seat of honour at 
dinner parties or who purifies by his presence the pankthi or persons 
who sit in the same row to dine with him.)
*694
 अनामयः The bestower of health. 
	A mere touch of His is like a celestial medicine (अनामयः ). He is 
an adversary to the great disease viz, संसार .  Since, संसार  is an 
obstacle to the power of enjoying the glory of  भगवान् , it is called 
a disease. Those who have realised its true nature have said, "I am 
full of disease."
*695
 मनोजवः He who is swift as thought. 
	He is so quick in doing things stated above that he has got the name 
मनोजवः  swift as though.
	श्री कृष्ण  Himself has sung in the गीता 
	"(By My Grace) soon he becomes one whose mind is devoted to 
dharma (of worship) (and attains enduring peace)."
	"The sins committed  in seven births, be they many or a few, 
all are destroyed the moment a man begins to place his foot in the 
temple of विष्णु ."
*696
 तीर्थकरः The source for the holiness. 
	He is the source for the sacredness of the Ganga, पुष्कर  (lake) 
and others which like Himself, purify all those that meditate on them 
and recite their names.
	Or He is तीर्थकरः  because He is the founder of  the good 
doctrines of the Sruthis and Smrithंs. Vide
	"योग , knowledge, संख्य  (Science, craft and other arts, वेदा-s, 
शास्त्रा and music- all have the origin in जनार्दन )."
Or He, Who is like a deep and unreachable ocean, makes a series 
of incarnations which are like steps with the help of which devotees 
are able to reach Him.
*697
 वसुरेता The source of Lustre.
	Here begins the Incarnation as कृष्ण. He is वसु-रेताः  the 
cause of the divine lustre. 'Vasu' means lustre.
	"O great sage! He took out the hairs, white and black."
	"They are known as केश  of Mine."
	The word 'केश ' has already been explained.
*698
 वसुप्रदः The treasure -giver
	He gives His own self, which is like a supreme treasure, 
to देवकी  and वासुदेव  as their son.
*699
 वसुप्रदः  The dignity - giver.
	He is the Father of the Universe; still He bestows on  देवकी  
and वासुदाव  the supreme glory of being the parents of Himself  Who 
is the Universal Father. So again He is वसु- प्रदः .
*700
 वासुदेवः The son of Vasudeva.
	He is वासुदाव also because of His being the son of वासुदाव .
