*901
 स्वस्तिदः  The giver of the Auspiciousness.
	In this way does He give supreme auspiciousness to all.
*902
 स्वस्तिकृत् The master of Auspiciousness
	He blesses the Mukthas by making them enjoy Him and His qualities. 
*903 स्वस्ति He Who is Auspiciousness.He Who is Himself Auspiciousness incarnate,""Svasti' signifies auspiciousness and benediction.""The affix 'ti' comes after the root 'as' (to be) when preceded by the preposition 'su'." Because of the addition of the affix 'शित्', 'भू ' is not substituted in the place of 'as'."*904
 स्वस्तिभुक् The Protector of Auspiciousness.
	भगवान्  protects all this auspiciousness and preserves them.
*905
 स्वस्तिदक्षिणः He who has Auspiciousness to be given as Dakhshinaa
or fee in the sacrifice.
	Bhagavan is performing, as if it were, a long sacrifice in 
which He offers His own self to His devotees. In that sacrifice He 
gives other auspicious things like celestial body and power to the 
मुक्ताs which will be conducive to the service they are doing to 
भगवान् . This is like the master of a sacrifice who gives दक्षिण  
or fee to the priests who are officiating in it. Hence this name 
स्वस्ती-दक्षिण .
*906
 अरौद्रः He who is not irascible nature. 
	Though He is the supreme ruler of the Universe. He is gentle 
by the agreeable coolness of His qualities and so not irate -- Araudrah. 
*907
 कुण्डली He who is bedecked with ear-rings. .
	He is always adorned by celestial ornaments befitting His body 
and status.
*908
 चक्री The Discus-armed. He has divine weapons also of like nature.
	He has divine weapons also of like nature.
*909
 विक्रमी He Who has prowess. 
	His actions are fascinating and befitting His majestic and  
heroic nature.
*910
 ऊर्जितशासनः He of inviolable commands. 
	His commands cannot be disobeyed even by  Brahma Indra and others.
*911
 शब्दातिगः He Who is beyond words. The greatness of the Lord 
	cannot be
      described in words by the multi-tongued Adisesha, by the Vedas with
      all their countless branches, and by the goddess Sarasvati herself.
	The greatness of the Lord cannot be described in words by the 
	multi-gongued  आदिशेष  (Anantha), by the वेदा with all their 
	countless branches, and by the goddess Sarasvathi herself.
	गजेन्द्र  Episode (Names 912 to 945)
*912
 शब्दसहः He who shoulders the burden of the words of cry of distress.
	With this name begins the episode of the relief given to गजेन्द्र .
	भगवान्  hears and bears as a great burden the cry of animals for help even though 
the noise is indistinct.
	"He was again and again thinking of the devotion of the elephant."
*913
 शिशिरः He who rushed to render help.
As soon as He heard the cry of distress of the elephant, He flew 
with great haste to the place where the elephant was. Because of  this 
speedy movement He is called 'Sisira'. The word 'sisira' is derived from 
the 'root' 'sasa' which signifies quick motion.
	"The words 'ajira', 'sisira' etc. are formed by the addition of the 
affix 'kirach'. According to this rule, 'sisira' has the 'rak'suffix 
irregularly.
*914
 शर्वरीकरः He who had the destructive weapons in His hands.
	(When He came for the rescue of Gajऍndra), the Lord had in His 
hands the five weapons which destroy the enemies who are a source of 
harm to others. (शर्वरी  means destructive weapons.) The word 'शर्वरी '
 is derived from the root 'sr' (to do harm), and the 'ष्वर्च ' affix 
has been added to it under the following rule. "The affix 'ष्वर्च' 
comes after 'kru', 'gru', 'sri' etc. The presence of 'ढa' at the
 beginning of the affix 'ष्वर्च' explains the addition of the 
affix 'ग्नीष् ' to denote the feminine gender. (Sri+ष्वर्च+ग्नीष्=शर्वरी ).
	The five weapons of the Lord are : Sankha, Chakra, गदा , सारंग  
(the bow) and Nandaka (the Sword). 	 
*915
 अक्रूरः He who is not cruel. 
	Because of His desire to rescue the elephant, though भगवान्  had 
all the weapons in His hands, He did not immediately cut the 
crocodile-अक्रूरः . Vide :
	"मधुसूदन , the Lord of  inscrutable nature, quickly 
took out not only the elephant which had been seized by the corcodile,
 but lifted up the corcodile also from the waters of the tank."
	"The affix 'rak' comes after 'kruth' (to out) and the final 'tha' 
is changed in one case to 'cha', and in the other case 'क्रू ' replaces 
the whole root." (Kruth+च=क्रूर ).
*916
 पेशलः He who is charming. 
	Because of the flurry to rescue the elephant, His garlands, 
ornaments and raiments were all in disorder. In spite of  it He was 
very charming  to look at.
*917
 दक्षः He who moves quickly. At once he came. 
*918
 दक्षिणः He who is pleasing and amiable. Though He came there
       immediately, he expressed regret that He was not near at the time
       of danger and consoled Gajendra with kind words.
	Though He came there immediately, He expressed regret that He was 
not near at the time of danger and consoled गजेन्द्र  with kind words. 
"Fie upon Me that I was far away from you."
	"The Lotus-eyed Slayer of Madhu, Who is kind and affectionate to 
the refugees, showed His love to गजेन्द्र   who worshipped Him."
The word दक्षिण  is derived from the root 'दक्ष ' (to grow or 
act quickly). "The affix 'इणन् ' is added to the roots 'dru' and 
'दक्षि '. 'Dru+इणन्=द्रविण ; दक्षि +इणन् =दक्षिणा ).
*919
 क्षमिणां वरः The foremost amongst those who have endurance. 
	It was only after seeing गजेन्द्र  that He felt relieved and 
heaved a sigh of relief."There  the  Lord of gods stood as though revived."
*920
 विद्वत्तमः The best of those who know what to do.
	He knew very well how to treat the wounded elephant.
	"O the foremost amongst the Kurus! 'Listen!, Madhusu:dana 
spoke thus to the elephant and gently touched it with His hand."
*921
 वीतभयः Because of whom the fear of Gajendra was dispelled. 
	Seeing the ardent zeal of the Lord in coming to him, the fear of 
गजेन्द्र  vanished.
*922
 पुण्यश्रवणकीर्तनः He who has made even the hearing and narrating of the
Gajendra episode meritorious.
	"O the best of Kurus! A person is immediately rid of his sins 
if he hears, thinks or talks about the story of  the  rescue of  
गजेन्द्र  by  the Lord."
*923
 उत्तारणः He who lifted up. 
	भगवान्  brought out of the lake both the elephant and the crocodile.
*924
 दुष्कृतिहा The Slayer of the evil-doer.
	"माधव  slew the crocodile with His discus when the crocodile was 
on  the  land."
*925
 पुण्यः The purifier.
	By this reputation in connection with the protection of  गजेन्द्र , 
He makes people like us also pure.
*926
 दुःखप्ननाशनः The remover of evil dreams.
	Who is like this?  भगवान्   Who  is  दुस्-स्वप्न-नाशन .
	"If a man thinks of Me, of You and this lake."
	Thus begins a passage and says :  "The bad dreams of all people 
are destroyed."  "This story is powerful enough to allay (the effects of) 
bad dreams."
*927
 वीरहा He who removed the powerful.
	भगवान्   killed  that strong  crocodile which gave trouble to 
गजेन्द्र .
	"गजेन्द्र  sought refuge in भगवान्  and the latter released 
him from the strings (of Yama)."
*928
 रक्षणः The Saviour. 
	भगवान्  saved the elephant  by  touching  it, embracing  it, 
and speaking words of consolation.
	"He placed His hand gently on the elephant."
*929
 सन्तः He who makes others prosper. 
	In this  way  He confers prosperity on His devotees.
	"The affix 'da' is seen to come after other roots also." The force 
of 'api' is that this affix comes after verbs and other cases in 
composition with such verbs.
	Another meaning of  Santhah is that भगवान्  exists  for  
His devotees. The use of the plural number as 'शान्तः ' (instead of 'san') 
is archaic. A third meaning  is that He grants their desires. This is the 
past participle form of the verb 'शनोति ' (he bestows).
	"The long 'आ' is substituted for the final of  'jan', 'san', 
'kan' etc. before the consonant-beginning desiderative affix 'san' 
and before any other affix beginning with a 'jhai' consonant which
has an indicatory 'ka' or 'gna'."
*930
 जीवनः The Life-giver. 
	By killing the crocodile with His hand, He brought it back to 
life as a Gandharva.
	"हूहु , the foremost among the गन्धर्वा-s, had become a 
crocodile by the curse of Sage देवल . Later when he met with his 
death at the hands of  श्री कृष्ण , he went back to Svarga."
*931
 पर्यवस्थितः He who stands beside. 
	On account of  His affection for गजेन्द्र   He stood closely around 
 him.
	"The  Lotus-eyed  Lord is  affectionate towards  those who seek 
refuge in Him and He has great love for them."
*932
 अनन्तरूपः  He of infinite Forms. 
	He has Innumerable forms like those described above  which He 
assumes straight away as occasion arises.
*933
 अनन्तश्रीः  He of endless wealth. 
	He has immense and endless wealth including the enjoyment of His 
own self, all  of which is to be given of  His devotees.
"Then  गजेन्द्र  attained a divine body  and  departed  to  the  
Supreme Abode."
*934
 जितमन्युः He who conquered His anger. 
	Now He conquered the anger and kept it under control against 
that water-creature (crocodile) which was the enemy of  the elephant, 
Gajऍndra, who had taken refuge in Him.
*935
 र्भयापहः He who may be prayed to for dispelling the fear.
	By virtue of His love for His devotees He can be relied upon to 
dispel our fear that we have no protector and we can pray to Him for 
removing our fear.
	"जनार्दन   always  protects  those  who are drowned in the great 
fear (of संसार )."
	"The affix 'da' comes after the verb 'han' (to kill) when the 
object is in composition with it and when benediction is intended. 
(शतुरम् वाध्यत् =शत्रुः  (May He kill the enemy)).
*936
 चतुरश्रः He who does what is befitting Him. 
	Quite, according with His greatness and good nature, He rushed 
with such great flurry to the rescue of गजेन्द्र Gajऍndra who cried aloud in 
distress that His railments, ornaments and garments were in great 
disorder; and He had an inordinate wrath against a small water-creature. 
Such zeal for the protection of devotees is quite in place.
*937
 गभीरात्मा  He of deep and profound nature. 
His profound nature was beyond the understanding of even Brahma 
and others.
*938
 विदिशः He who is far above all. 
	Nature, forms, qualities--all that pertain to the Lord are beyond 
the reach of the humble and faltering words of praise of Brahma and others.
*939
 व्यादिशः The Conferer of posts. 
	It is He that confers  various posts of  duty in the divine  
hierarchy as desired by them.
	"After a verb ending in a consonant, but preceded by 'I' 'u' or 
'r' (long or short) comes the affix 'ka'.
*940
 दिशः He who commands. 
	He does not treat Brahma and others and Intimate friend like गजेन्द्र , but issues 
commands to them (as they are His subordinates).
	"All the gods with Indra at their head, witnessed the release of 
गजेन्द्र  (from the jaws of the crocodile) and being led by Brahma 
prostracted with folded hands before the great and Supreme Lord नारायण , 
Hari-the Dispeller of distress. They along with प्रजापती were seeing 
all that with their eyes wide open with joy and dismay."
	In the पौष्कर  (samhitha) it is said) : "He Who rescued गजेन्द्र  
from the crocodile is indeed the same Lord Who cuts asunder the bonds of  
संसार ."
*941
 अनादिः He who is not accepted as master by some. In the nature the Lord
to reign Himself into the hands of his deotees eventhough they may belong to
the animal species like Gajendra. But he gives only fruits of a lower order
to Brahma and others, because he is not accepted and worshipped by them
as the master; and they are longing for other things.
It is the nature of the Lord to resign Himself into the hands of  
His devotees even though they may belong to the animal species like 
गजेन्द्र . But He gives only fruit of a lower order to Brahma and others, 
because He is not accepted and worshipped by them as the Master; and they 
are longing for other things.
*942
 भूर्भुवः He who id the abode of those that really live.
If a person has the correct knowledge that he is the servant of the
Lord Who is the master, then he is said to be a 'bhu:'--one who really 
lives. For that person (bhuvah) भगवान्  becomes an abode (भू ). That is 
why He said to गजेन्द्र  :
	"Here after you will live in Me alone. There is no doubt about it."
*943
 लक्ष्मीः The wealth. he alone is all the riches for his deotees
	He alone is all  the riches for His devotees.
	"My kingdom, My life and My happiness are all centred in you."
	"For the Pandavas  श्री कृष्ण  is the support, श्री कृष्ण   is their 
strength and श्री कृष्ण  is their protector. श्री कृष्ण  is their sole 
Lord even as the moon is to the stars."
*944
 सुवीरः He who possesses great valour. 
	He has great valour by  virtue of  which He is able to retrieve 
His devotees from their downfall.
*945
 रुचिराङ्गदः He who bestows His lovely form. 
	भगवान्  bestows on His devotees His lovely body  which is  fit  
to be enjoyed very much. Vide :
	"Thy form is not for Thee; (nor Thy body,  Thy weapons and Thy 
abode are for Thee. Still Thou showest  Thyself  in  the form of a  
Puruढa for the delectation of  Thy devotees)."
*946
 जननः The Creator.
	Next  the  purpose of all the actions of  भगवान्  are described.
	He creates other beings also with organs  suitable  for  enjoying  Him.
*947
 जनजन्मादिः He who is the fruit of the birth of beings.
	He is the cause and also the fruit of the birth of all of them.
	He is the cause and also the fruit of  the birth of all of them -- 
जनजन्मादिः . Vide :
"This day my birth has become  fruitful (and my night has given place  to  an auspicious dawn, 
because I am going to see  श्री कृष्ण )."
"The only  act that is not fruitless in this life is that which  has  
something to  do  with  कृष्ण ."
Amongst all beings, the body of that person alone is of  good birth 
which shines  with  hair standing on their ends out  of  joy when the name 
of कृष्ण  is pronounced."
	"Today  my  birth has become fruitful."
*948
 भीमः  He who is frightful. 
	He is the cause of  further births, hell etc.  to those who are 
averse to the great grace that He shows. He treats as enemies those who 
do not favour Him; but that is done only with the object of doing good 
to them by correcting them.
	"I throw continually those who hate me into the संसार  and into 
none other than demoniac wombs, for they are cruel, unholy and the 
worst of men)."
*949
 भीमपराक्रमः He who has terrific powers. 
	In the case of others like हिरण्य  etc. who are bent upon doing 
harm to the world, He shows His terrific valour. That too is a blessing 
for them, just as in the case of mad men who are bound with chains so 
that it is beneficial to them and to those who are troubled by them.
*950
 आधारनिलयः The abode of those who are the support of others .
	Because of  their righteous nature Prahlada, विभीषण , the 
पाण्डवा and the like are a support for the world.  The Lord is the 
abode for such pious men. In the विष्णु-स्मृति  it is stated that they 
are really a support to the world.
	"Those who strictly follow the rules of conduct laid down for the 
different castes and stages of life (ब्रह्मचारी गृहस्ता etc.) and 
also follow the dictates of the शास्त्राs, are your support' O Mother 
Earth! On them does your burdent rest."
*951
 धाता The Preceptor of Dharma. 
	He is  Himself  the  Preceptor  of  Dharma by practising it  Himself.
(श्री कृष्णा  says)--"There is nothing  that  I ought to do (still, 
I am observing all the duties.)"
*952
 पुष्पहासः He who is like the bloom of a flower. 
	In the case of  those who have been invested with the capacity 
to enjoy Him. He manifests gently. His enjoyable nature like a flower 
that blossoms in the evening.  So He is पुष्प-हस .
*953
 प्रजागरः He who is awake. 
	He is wide awake night and day to protect His devotees like the 
farmer who keeps awake night and day to protect  His  devotees like the 
farmer who keeps  awake  protecting  the  crops.
	"While all are asleep, the Supreme पुरुष  keeps awake and creates 
desired things  resolving for their enjoyment."
*954
 ऊर्ध्वगः He who rises high.
	For that purpose (of creating things), why should He be sleepless? 
Because He is ऊर्ध्वगः --i.e. because of His nature which is high. 
Vide :
	"If a person has taken resort to the noble-minded, he does not 
lose his spirit even in times of trouble."
*955
 सत्पथाचारः He who makes others go in the right path. 
	He is noble by nature as a result of which He always indues them 
to go in the right path of servitude which is theirs  by nature.
	"You are now in the transitory and unhappy world. (To get over it) 
worship Me." (says कृष्ण  to Arjuna.)
*956
 प्राणदः   The life giver. 
	He confers redemption on the souls of those who have become 
unconscious, as it were by consuming the poison viz. material objects.
 So He is प्राणदः.
*957
 प्रणवः  He who makes them bow before him.
	By means of  the  Manthra, प्रणव  (ॐकार ), He reveals to 
His devotees the true relationship between Himself and themselves and 
makes them pay obeisance to Him. He says to them "Bow before Me." In 
the Attharva-siras it is stated :
	"This Manthra is called 'प्रणव ', because it makes all beings 
bow before Him.
*958
 पणः He who makes a transaction. 
	At times He so behaves as though there is an exchange of qualities 
between Himself and His devotees as Master and servant. He acts as if 
they are the masters and He is their servant.
*959
 प्रमाणं The valid authority. 
	He reveals the secret and mystic truths of the Vऍdँs without 
doubt or error. So He is प्रमाणं .
*960
 प्राणनिलयः He Who is the abode for all beings. 
	प्राणः  means those that live. (i.e. all other जीवा-s also). Just as 
the birds resort to their nests all beings resort  to  Him for living 
there.
	"The affix 'gha' generally comes in the sense of an instrument or 
location after a root when the word to be formed is a name and is in 
the masculine gender."
*961
 प्राणधृत् He who is the sustainer of living beings. 
	He sustains all living beings like a mother.
*962
 प्राणजीवनः He who nourishes the beings. 
	He nourishes all living beings as food and drink do.
*963
 तत्वं He who is the essence.
	He by pervasion and usefulness, is the essence of all things, 
sentient and non-sentient, like the butter which is the essence 
of milk and curd.
	"गोविन्दा  is the true entity and he is the cause of creation 
destruction as well as protection. If a person seeks refuge in Him, 
he will never be in grief."
	"Place the entire Universe on one pan and भगवान् जनार्दन  on 
the other. जनार्दन  is superior to the whole Universe because of  His 
intrinsic greatness."
*964
 तत्त्ववित् The knower of the truth. 
	Similarly, He knows the Truth about His own self.  The texts say :
	"Thou alone art aware of  Thy self."
	"O पुरुषोत्तम ! Thou knowest Thy self  by  Thy own self."
*965
 एकात्मा The one unique and Superior Soul. 
	He alone is the Master (शेषी) , enjoyer and well-wisher of all 
sentient and non-sentient objects.
*966
 जन्ममृत्युजरातिगः  He who is beyond birth, death and old age.
	Though He is the Inner Soul of both the sentient and the non-sentient, 
He is possessed of a nature which is absolutely free from that of both of 
them.
*967
 भूर्भुवः स्वस्तरुः 
	He who is the tree for the beings of the three worlds-earth, 
sky and heaven.	He is like the पारिजात, the celestial tree, for all 
the beings living in the worlds beginning with earth, sky and heaven 
even as a tree is a welcome resort for birds and travellers by virtue 
of its green foliage and cool shade.
	"If a person resorts to the eternal Tree of  Brahman, there is no 
doubt about the fall of its ripe fruit in his hands." (He may be sure 
about the release from संसार  and the attainment of मोक्ष .)
*968
 तारः He who is a ferry. 
	He is called तार  because He helps the beings to cross the sea of  
	संसार .
*969
 सविता  He who produces. 
	He is सविता   since,  He generates all things.
*970
 प्रपितामहः  The great grandfather. 
	He is the father (generator) of पितामह  (i.e. Brahma). (Brahma is 
called a grand-father because he is the first father of all those who 
created other beings.)
*971
 यज्ञः  He who is the sacrifice.
	He is Himself the sacrifice (Japa-yagjna) for those who wiढ to 
attain Him, but who do not have the where with all  to acquire the 
dharma to worship Him.
*972
 यज्ञपतिः The Lord of Yagna sacrifice. 
	He gives the fruit of  the sacrifice done to please Him.
*973
 यज्वा He who performs the sacrifice. 
	He is Himself the sacrificer in the case of  those who are unable 
to do a sacrifice. In the वैष्णव धर्म  in the अश्वमेधिक पर्व 
(of Mahabharatha), भगवान् कृष्ण  Himself says :
	'O युधिष्ठिर ! For the purification of those (who are unable to 
observe the daily rites), I am Myself doing the Yagjna at both dawn and 
dusk every day. I never fail in carrying out this vow of Mine.
*974
 यज्ञाङ्गः He who has the sacrifices of others as an accessory to
	what He is doing.
	All the sacrifices done by others, who have the ability to do 
them, serve as an auxiliary for the यज्ञ  He does and serve only 
this purpose.
*975
 यज्ञवाहनः  He who helps others to complete their sacrifices. 
	He helps those who perform the sacrifices by investing them with 
the necessary power, faith and equipment to perform them.
*976
 यज्ञभृदत् He who brings about the completion of the sacrifice.
	Even if a sacrifice may be defective in some way, He rectifies it 
and makes it perfect by making the sacrificer think of Him and submit 
the final sacrificial offering known as the पूर्ण-आहुति . Vide :
	"If there is a mistake in the performance of sacrifices due to 
negligence or over-sight, the sacrifices will become imperfect. If 
the person thinks of विष्णु , the defect is removed and the sacrifice 
becomes perfect. This is what the Sruthi says."
*977
 यज्ञकृत् He who created the sacrifice.
	He first created the sacrifice for the well-being of the Universe.
*978
 यज्ञी He for Whose sake the sacrifices are done. 
	He is the Master for whose propitiation all sacrifices are performed. 
*979
 यज्ञभुक् The enjoyer or the protector of the sacrifice. 
	It is भगवान्  that enjoys the offering in all sacrifices or it 
is He that protects them.
*980
 यज्ञसाधनः He Who is an accessory for the sacrifice. 
	The Sacrifices become the means for attainment of the respective 
fruits only because of the knowledge about Him.
*981
 यज्ञान्तकृत् He who produces the fruit of the sacrifices.
	"All करमा-s have their end in the knowledge of the Lord", as 
stated in the गीता . He makes the attainment of the true knowledge (of भगवान् ) as 
the end and goal of all sacrifices.
*982
 यज्ञगुह्यम् He Who is the secret of the sacrifice. 
	Though भगवान्  is not in wants, He accepts the offerings made in a 
sacrifice as though He has been long expecting them and enjoys them. 
Thus He feels satisfied and also satisfies those who do sacrifices. 
This is understood only by the wise who know the injunctions, the means 
and the fruit of sacrifices, but not by those who have only a superficial 
knowledge. Hence the name "the Secret of the sacrifice."
	"All the वेदा-s and all that has to be learnt, all the Sँsthra! 
and all sacrifices, and all worship--all are श्री कृष्ण . O' Kings!. 
Those who know कृष्ण  correctly in this way, may be considered to have 
completed successfully all sacrifices."
	"All the shining luminaries in the world, the three worlds and 
three guardians of the worlds, the three fires and the five offerings 
in them and all the gods-all, all are श्री  कृष्ण  the son of देवकी ." 
And so on.
*983
 अन्नम् The object of enjoyment. 
	He is experienced by those who have been blessed by Him with the 
power to enjoy Him.
*984
 अन्नादः The Enjoyer of those who enjoy Him. 
	He is अन्नादः  since, He also enjoys them in the same way as they 
enjoy Him. The word 'ऍव' suggests the question. Who else is there like 
Him? The word 'Cha' denotes that all that has been said so far are 
perfectly in this one Deity, भगवान् .
*985
 आत्मयोनिः He who mixes others with Himself 
	Like mixing the sugar with milk, He mixes with Himself  those 
who enjoy Him.
*986
 स्वयंजातः He who is self born. 
	Without expecting the prayers of others  He takes birth in the 
world  by  Himself.
*987
 वैखानः He Who uproots.
	He is called वैखानः, because having taken birth in this world 
He uproots the sorrows of the world. The word 'वैखानः' is derived 
from the root 'खान' (to dig out) with the preposition 'vi'.
	"The affix 'gha' as well as 'ghajn' comes after the verb 'खान' 
(to dig) when the word to be formed is an appellative and related to 
the verb as an instrument or location."
	"The affix 'yath' comes after a word in locative construction 
in the sense of excellent in regard thereto." Here 'an' has been added.
*988
 सामगायनः  He before whom the Sama Hymns are sung.
	He has the released souls beside Him who praises Him by singing 
the साम -hymns 'हाव् हाव् हाव् ' in a state of  intoxication produced by 
the drink of honey  viz.  the attainment of भगवान् . 
	"The Muktha remains there singing this साम -hymn."
	"The affix 'nyuth' is also employed after the verb 'gai' 
(to sing) when the agent so expressed is an artist."
*989
 देवकीनन्दनः The source of joy of Devakee.
	What has been said so far is not with reference to परमात्मा , 
the Transcendent and supreme Lord, but only about the son of  देवकी .
	"O the best of  भारता-s! जनार्दन , the broad and  long-eyed 
 Lord is your Kinsman. He is all things in the past, present and future.
*990
 स्रष्टा The creator. It is he whi is in the Transcendent Form also.
	It is He (कृष्ण ) Who is in the Transcendent Form (of Para-वासुदेव )
also.
*991
 क्षितीशः The lord of earth.
	"He is of infinite forms and is in the form of the entire Universe. 
He bears by His body all the worlds in His womb.'.
	As  stated above, He is the Lord of all things. Still He is called 
क्षितीश (the Lord of the world), because there is great distress only
 on the earth and He often comes here as its Lord in order to relieve it 
of its suffering.
*992
 पापनाशनः The destroyer of sins.
	By the nectar-like stories of  His describing the stealing of 
 butter and curd, रास-क्रीड  with the गोपी-s and like He removes the 
sins of all people. Even during Incarnations, He annihilates the enemies,
 both internal and external, of  श्री वैष्णवा-s (the devotees of  विष्णु).
	Finally, He is described as the bearer of celestial weapons 
which is a symbol of His supreme overlordship.
*993
 शङ्गभृत् The bearer of Sankha. 
	He not only bears the  Sankha, but He also nourishes it with 
the nectar of  His coral - like lips. 
*994
 नन्दकी He who has Nandaka, the sword. 
	The name Nandaka signifies that even by the great Lord prayer 
is made to it that it should give Him joy in victory. He is called नन्दकी  
because it is for ever inseparably associated with Him.
	"The affix 'vun' is employed after all verbs when benediction is 
intended." (नन्दकी =May He keep me happy).
*995
 चक्री He who has the Chakra (dsicus). 
	Bhagavan is always armed with the Discus, Sudarsana, by name. 
He is also always good-looking because of that. The Chakra is smeared 
with the blood of the Asuras who are the sworn enemies of the gods 
who are ever  His devout servants, and it is adorned by the flames of 
fire ढooting out of it. He is चक्री , because He has it as His weapon. 
*996
 शार्ङ्गधन्वा 
	 He has the bow, named  शार्ङ्ग  which is quite befitting Him and 
which, by its twang and the shower of arrows issuing out of   it, puts 
an end to the very names of  His enemies.
*997
 गदाधरः He who bears the Mace.
	He holds the Mace, कैमोदकी  by name which is the queen among all 
maces, which gives Him pleasure and which emits flames all around like 
the fire at the final dissolution of all the worlds.
*998
 रथाङ्गपाणिः He Who is armed with the Wheel in His hand.
	Quite appropriately He has in His hand रथाङ्ग  (a limb of the 
chariot, i.e. wheel or discus). So He is रथाङ्गपाणिः.
	Mention was made of the Chakra in the name चक्री  and here it is 
again mentioned. There is no tautology since, in चक्री  the reference 
is to the relationship of the possessor and the possessed. Here it 
signifies the readiness for action at all times.
*999
 अक्षोभ्यः He Who is unshakable. 
	भगवान् 's vow to give protection to those who seek refuge in 
Him is so firm that it cannot be ढaken even by His own great self, 
much less by others. He is अक्षोभ्यः .
*1000
 सर्वप्रहरणायुधः  He who has all weapons that act against evil.
	He has also numberless other divine weapons befitting Him which 
are powerful enough to uproot completely the distress of  His devotees 
who are rooted in Him;--weapons which have taken a vow as it were in 
a long sacrifice to protect at all times at all places by all means, 
and in all ways those who have resorted to Him; which have unlimited 
power, which are like ornaments to Him and which help Him to discharge 
His duties as the Supreme Lord of the Universe. He is सर्वप्रहरणायुधः.
	सर्वप्रहरणायुधः ॐ नम इति --The name सर्वप्रहरणायुधः 
is repeated to show that the Text विष्णु -सहस्रनाम has concluded. The 
Mystic syllable 'ॐ' shows all auspiciousness. नमः  means prostrations 
to the Lord.
	Thus from these thousand names it is declared that the Supreme 
Being, Bhagavan पुरुषोत्तम , the consort of  Sri, is the very antithesis 
of all defects. His sublime and auspicious essential nature, forms, 
qualities, power and activities are all completely devoid of any 
conditioning adjuncts; they are infinite and unlimited. His supremacy 
as well as His amiability are unexcelled and uncontrolled. He is the 
friend in distress, the Tree of Paradise in fulfilling the desires of 
men, and the very life of those who have taken refuge in Him. In short, 
भगवान् पुरुषोत्तम श्रीमन् नारायण  is the wonderful mine of all riches 
and wealth to His devotees.
	श्रीमन् नारायण  is adorned by Vanamala (the garland) and is armed 
with the Mace, शार्ङ्ग  (the bow), the Conch, the Discus and Nandaka 
(the sword). He is विष्णु  (all-pervasive) and वासुदेव  (Who resides 
in all things and in Whom all things reside). May that  वासुदेव  save 
us all.
