 ।। श्री पञ्चायुधस्तोत्रम् ।।

स्फुरत्सहस्रारशिखातितीव्रं सुदर्शनं भास्करकोटितुल्यम् ।
सुरद्विषां प्राणविनाशि विष्णोश्चक्रं सदाऽहं शरणं प्रपद्ये ।। 1 ।।
Ever do I seek refuge in Vishnu's Chakra (Discus)
Sudarsana (by name and of charming appearence) - Discus,
which is greatly powerful with a thousand spokes of glittering
flames, which is similar to a crore of Suns, and which destroys
the lives of the Asuras, enemies of Gods.

विष्णोर्मुखोत्थानिलपूरितस्य यस्य ध्वनिर्दानवदर्पहन्ता ।
तं पाञ्चजन्यं शशिकोटिशुभ्रं शङ्खं सदाऽहं शरणं प्रपद्ये ।। 2 ।।
Ever do I seek refuge in Paanchajanya, the Conch, the
sound of which, filled by the air emanating from the mouth
of Vishnu, puts an end to the pride of the Asuras, and which is
white like a crore of Moons.

हिरण्मयीं मेरुसमानसारां कौमोदकीं दैत्यकुलैकहन्त्रीम् ।
वैकुण्ठवामाग्रकराभिमृष्टां गदां सदाऽहं शरणं प्रपद्ये ।। 3 ।।
Ever do I seek refuge in Kaumodaki, the Mace of gold,
which is equal in strength to Mount Meru, which is the peerless
slayer of the hordes of Asuras, and which is gently touched by
by the forepart of the left hand of Vaikuntha (i.e. Vishnu,
the Blemishless).

रक्षोऽसुराणां कठिनोग्रकण्ठच्छेदक्षरच्छोणितदिग्धधारम् ।
तं नन्दकं नाम हरेः प्रदीप्तं खड्गं सदाऽहं शरणं प्रपद्ये ।। 4 ।।
Ever do I seek refuge in the shining Sword of Hari
Nandaka by name, the blade of which is smeared with the blood
flowing from the severed necks, hard and frightful of the
Rakshasas and Asuras.

यज्ज्यानिनादश्रवणात्सुराणां चेतांसि निर्मुक्तभयानि सद्यः ।
भवन्ति दैत्याशनिबाणवर्षि शार्ङ्गं सदाऽहं शरणं प्रपद्ये ।। 5 ।।
Ever do I seek refuge in Saarnga, the Bow, by hearing
the twang of the bow-string of which the hearts of gods at once
become devoid of fear and which (bow) showers thunder like
arrows of the Asuras.

इमं हरेः पञ्चमहायुधानां स्तवं पठेद्योऽनुदिनं प्रभाते ।
समस्तदुःखानि भयानि सद्यः पापानि नश्यन्ति सुखानि सन्ति ।। 6 ।।
If a person reads daily in the morning this Hymn of the
five great weapons of Vishnu, all his sorrows, tears and  sins
will at once vanish and joys ensure.

वने रणे शत्रुजलाग्निमध्ये यदृच्छयापत्सु महाभयेषु ।
इदं पठंस्तोत्रमनाकुलात्मा सुखी भवेत्तत्कृतसर्वरक्षः ।। 7 ।।
If a person recites this Hymn when he happens to be in
the forest or in the battle-field, or in the midst of foes, floods or
fire, or in unexpected dangrs or in great fright, his mind will
get rid of all uneasiness and being well-protected by the weapons,
he will be hapy in every way.