*201
 सर्वदृक् He who sees all. 
	भगवान्  alone sees all  whether they are well-disposed or hostile or 
indifferent towards Him-in order to rule over them and reward them 
according to their deserts. So He is सर्वदृक्. He can also see on 
all sides. 
	"The affix 'kvin' is added to the root 'dris' (to see). 'ku' takes 
the place of the 'kvin' affix. 
*202
 सिंहः The lion.
	Who is like this? Simhah. भगवान्  has assumed the great body of 
a man and a lion.
	"After the root 'sich' comes the affix 'ka' when the word derived 
from it denotes the name of a thing. The 'cha' of the root is replaced 
by 'ha' and there is also the 'num' augment.
*203
 सन्धाता He who makes his devotees join Him. 
	Though He is frightful when He, as a lion, crushes the elephant-like 
enemies. He makes प्रह्लाद  and others join Him who are devoted to Him.
*204
सन्धिमान् He who is has the company.
	His association with the devotees is permanent and so He is called 
सन्धिमान् . 	The affix 'mathup' has the sense of  permanent connection.
*205
 स्थिरः He who is firm. 
	He is Stthirah (i.e.) firmly attached to His devotees and is not affected 
by their wrongs. The Manthra in His praise refers to Him as "Bhadram" i.e. 
gracious."The affix 'kirach' is added to the root 'स्था' (to stand) and 
the final vowel 'आ' in 'स्था' is dropped."
*206
अजः The Birthless. 
	He is Aja (birthness) since He emerged out of a pillar and was not 
born like others.
	The affix 'da' is seen to come after the root 'jan' (to be born) 
with a past signification, though it be in  preposition with other nouns.
	"He is not born of a mother and so He is Aja. He is also he conqueror 
of all."
*207
दुर्मर्षणः The Unassiable. 
He is unassailable since it is impossible for His enemies to overcome Him.
	"The Bearer of the Discus and the Conch, a Form of the Brahman and 
the Formidable"  This is His form to be meditated upon. 
*208
शास्ता The Chastiser.
	भगवान्  is शास्ता , because He righteously punishes those who are 
like thorns ( to good men).
	"The 'trn' affix is added in the sense of doing an act justly."
	"The affixes 'trn' and 'trch' are added after the roots 'sams', 
'kshad' and others respectively when the word so formed is a name; and 
the affixes do not take the intermediate 'I' The rot 'सास' (to govern) 
comes under this rule by the word 'आदि' in the सुत्र ."
	"By whose roar the दानवा-s (the demons) became terrified."
	"The Demons field (away from Nrusimha)".
*209
विश्रुतात्मा He whose exploits are heard with wonder.
	He is that भगवान्  whose exploits are heard with wonder by all, 
at times and at all places."
	"By the chiefs of gods and the rulers of men."
*210
 सुरारिहा The slayer of the enemy of gods. He is Suraarihaa since 
	it\ was He who Slew Hirnya-kasipu, the enemy of gods by rending 
asunder his chest.
	He is सुरारिहा since it was He who siew हिरण्य कशिपु . the enemy 
of gods by rending as under his chest. 
	"He affords complete protection from all fears (of the संसार ) 
with both His hands effulgent with rows of nails composed of pure 
सत्व-गुण." This is the Manthra for meditation on Him.
*211
 गुरुर्गुरुतमः The foremost among the Preceptors.
	Next begins the Mathsya Avathara (Fish Incarnation). He is the great 
Preceptor who confers a knowledge of all Things.
"He is the Preceptor of even the ancient" is what the 
Hairanya-garbhas say about Him.
	"Thou art worthy of respect and art a teacher greater (than all)."
	The word 'Guru' is derived from the root 'gr' (to sound). 
"The affix 'ku' comes after the root 'kri' (to do) and 'gr' (to sound).
'U' is substituted in the place of 'r' and 'ra' follows such 'u'."
Here the word 'Guru-thamah' is an adjective is an adjective that 
qualities the name 'Guru' and not a separate name by itself.
*212
 धाम The place of Residence.
	भगवान्  is called धाम  (the Resting Place) since He is the saviour 
like a helmsman who steers at the time of Deluge the boat carrying the 
seeds of all the transitory moving and non-moving objects.
	The affix 'मनिन् ' is added to the reot 'धाञ' under the grammatical 
rulऍ "The affix 'मनिन् ' comes after all roots."
*213
 सत्यः The Good.
	He is the good to good people like Manu and
   others who sought refuge in Him at that time.
	He is Sathya (the good) to good people like Manu and others who 
sought refuge in Him at that time.
*214
 सत्य-पराक्रमः He of truthful acts.
भगवान् 's actions towards Manu and others were always true and 
not deceptive.
*215
 निमिषः He with His eyes closed. 
	Towards those who are the enemies of His devotees. He closes His 
eyes (i.e. He does not cast His benignant glances on them.) So He is 
निमिषः 
*216
 अनिमिषः He with His eyes closed.
	Who is like this? अनिमिष  - He does not close His eyes and is 
ever awake towards the good. He is Animia in the celestial 
Fish-Incarnation.
*217
 स्स्रग्वी Adorned with a garland.
	भगवान्  is स्स्रग्वी  (possessed of a garland). Though He is in the 
form of an animal moving horizontally (here, fish in the Mathsya-avathara). 
He has the Vaijayanthi Garland which is always associated with Him and 
which is indicative of supremacy.
	(Vaijayanthi  the necklace of भगवान् विष्णु (composed of five gems, 
viz. Pearl, ruby, emerald, sapphire and diamond.)
	"After a stem ending in 'as', and after ' माया' and 'sraj' and 
मेधा  comes the affix 'vini'."(Sraj + Vini -स्स्रग्वी).
*218
 वाचस्पतिः The Lord of Speech. 
	भगवान्  is called  वाचस्पतिः  since, it was He Who propounded the 
meaning of the वेदा-s through श्रीमद् मत्स्य पुराण 
The genitive case termination of 'वाचः ' is not dropped. 
"For the visarga of the genitive, the letter 's' is substituted in 
the वेदा-s before 'पति ' 'पुत्र' and other words."(वाचः+pathih = वाचस्पति ).
*219
 उदारधीः He of vast knowledge.
By virtue of His omniscience भगवान्  can be relied upon for help by all. 
So He is उदारधीः 
*220
 अग्रणीः The guide to a high place. 
	Because of the quality mentioned above, भगवान्  conducts all to the 
highest place viz. Parama-pada.
*221
 ग्रामणीः He who is the leader of the hosts of Angels.
	There भगवान्   leads the hosts of  Ever-free Angels. So He is 
ग्रामणीः 
	"The affix 'kvip' comes after the following verbs when in composition 
with a word ending in a case-affix though it may be an Upasarga; the verbs 
are 'sad', 'सू:', 'द्विष् ' 'नि' etc." The 'n' of the root 'ni' becomes the 
cerebral 'ख' by the rule"The dental 'n' is substituted by the cerebral 'ण' 
when it comes after 'agra' and 'ग्राम'. 
*222
 श्रीमान् He who is endowed woth wealth. 
	This name clearly indicates that He is in possession of the 
Transcendental Glory and overlordship. Vide 
	"Mathsya, the Lotus-eyed (in मत्स्य-अवतार )."
*223
 न्यायः The just.
	He does what is just and proper and sees that nothing happens to the 
devotees which will be unwelcome or faulty. So He is न्याय .
	"The affix 'ghajn' comes after the roots 'ni' (to lead) and 'ई' 
(to go) when the prepositions 'pari' and 'ni' are respectively in 
composition with them and when the words so formed respectively mean a 
game and propriety or law."
*224
 नेता He who carries out the commands of the devotees.
	He is नेता   since, He is always in the habit of managing the affairs 
of His devotees. It is indeed quite proper that He dives deep into the 
sea and brings about the redemption of great souls.
*225
 समीरणः He whose actions are delectable. 
	In this way His activities are to His own liking and to that of His 
devotees; hence He is called समीरणः. The word 'समीरणः' is derived from 
the root 'ईर्' which means 'to move' or 'to shake'. The affix 'yuch' comes 
in the sense of the agent having such a habit etc. after intransitive 
verbs denoting motion or sound ('chalana-moving; 'ईर्'-going, or shaking). 
पवन  (292) and other words also are formed by this rule.
	Here are some verses from the Scriptures as the authority for what 
has been said before.
	"भगवान्  took the form of a Fish and at once proceeded to the 
रसातल -लोक  (the Nether-world). He, the embodiment of the वेदा-s, 
brought from there the वेदा-s, to the place of Brahma.
	मत्स्य-अवतार  (Fish Incarnation) should be meditated upon as 
follows :
	"He is adorned by knowledge and other numerous qualities in the 
form of fins and shines whith a proboscis shooting out like a horn. He has 
the intoxication of the Supreme Brahman rising out of Himself.
	"He has a body which is spotless like the white pearls and which 
carries at the end of the कल्पा-s (aeons) the vast Earth which is in the 
form of a boat and which has in it groups of प्रजापती-s 
(Secondary creators). And He has the form of a fiढ with unwinking eyes 
and closed mouth."
*226
 सहस्रमूर्धा The thousand headed.
The heads, eyes and feet mentioned in these names are to be interpreted as 
including all organs of knowledge and action as being implicit. The word 
'Thousand'  signifies that they are innumerable (and not only one thousand).
 That this is the meaning can be understood from the वेदिक् texts:
	"He has eyes on all sides."
	Learned scholars worthy of respect have declared that these words 
(eyes and hands and feet on all sides) signify that भगवान्  is endowed 
with infinite capacity to know and act, which are the functions of those 
organs. Such an interpretation is not only appropriate, but also is in 
aggreement with many Sasthric texts.
*227
 विश्वात्मा The All-pervading Deity.
	He is विश्वात्मा, because He pervades the entire Universe by His 
knowledge and strength. Vide -
	"He pervades the Earth in all its entirety."
	"By virtue of which He stands as the Inner Soul of all."
	"By Whom all this is pervaded."
	"गुदाकेश ! (Arjuna!) I am the आत्म  that resides in (the heart of) 
all beings."
*228
 सहस्राक्षः The thousand eyed.
*229
 सहस्रपात् The thousand footed.
*230
 आवर्तनः  He who turns the wheels of Samsara. 
Who turns (the wheel of संसार ). Since He whirls the wheel of संसार 
(material world) which is also like also a see-saw for raising water from 
a well, He is called आवर्तन . Vide 
	"By Him is rotated this great wheel of  संसार ."
	"Revolving all beings (as though mounted on a machine)."
	"भगवान् केशव is incessantly rotating by His Yogic powers the 
wheel of time, the wheel of the Universe and the wheel of the aeons 
(युगा-s)."
	"From Him was born the विराट् (Brahma, the cosmic पुरुष )."
	The same idea is corroborated by these and other texts.
*231
 निवृत्तात्मा He whose Nature rises above other things. 
	He has a personality which is superior, because He is the Master of 
the Transcendental Glory which is thrice the glory of the material world. 
Vide 
	"The पुरुष  stands eminent in the Parama-pada which is thrice (the 
material world)."
	"He is greater than the greatest, more exalted than the most exalted."
*232
 संवृतः He who remains Hidden.
	In that state He is invisible to the unenlightened in whom the 
तमो गुणा predominates. So He is Samvruthah. Vide 
	"Beyond darkness does He remain"
*233
 संप्रमर्दनः The Dispeller.
	"He is Sampramardana, because He dispels the enveloping darkness by 
(the light of) His knowledge."
	"He who realises (i.e. meditates on) Him ( परमपुरुष ) thus, becomes 
immortal here."
	"Those who know Him thus become immortal where-as others (that do not 
know Him) go in for misery."
*234
 अहः  संवर्तको He who turns the day. 
He is the cause for the revolution of the day (and other divisions of Time).
The affix 'nvul' has been added. "For 'yu' and 'vu' (nasalised) in an afffix 
('yu' and 'nvul') are substituted respectively 'ana' and 'aka'. 
(Sam+vruth-nvulsamvruth+aka-Samvarthaka)
	"All moments (i.e. beings governed by the time element) were born 
out of the Radiant पुरुष ."
	"The wheel of time (He rotates)."
	"भगवान्  alone controls Time etc." 
	Time is always a toy for भगवान् . By its divisions into past, 
present and future, it is responsible for the knowledge of an object as 
old or young. He controls it which brings about the union or separation 
of Prakruthi and पुरुष (Matter and Soul). It is also the cause of the 
six kinds of transmutations of Prakruthi (viz. Birth, existence, change, 
growth, decay and finally death).	Some say that Time is only the series 
of the transmutations of Prakruthi (Matter) in a fixed order. Others opine 
that it is the sum-total of the activities of परमेश्वर . Yet others are 
of the view that Time is an independent entity.
	The passage in the पौष्कर संहित should be suitably interpreted. 
(Here is the passage.)
	"अध्यात्मा  refers to Time, the Reality. आदि -daivam is Paramathma, 
who is the Inner Soul of the Universe and Whose form is the cause of its 
creation and destruction.आदि-भूत  should be understood as the three 
worlds composed of the five elements (Pancha-bhu:tha).
	Time in this world of Avyaktha-thaththva is in the form of अध्यात्मा.
आदि-दैवम् is 'इज्या ' (worship). आदि-भूत  is true enjoyment." 
*235
 वह्निः The Bearer.
	Since, भगवान्  bears the Universe in the form of space. He is called 
वह्निः. The word 'vahni' is formed by the following grammatical rule : "The 
affix 'nith' comes after the roots 'vah', 'sri', 'yu',  'dru', 'glai', 'हा' 
and  'thvar'. (Vah+ni=Vahnih).
	The foremost space is Parama-आकाश  (the Supreme Abode). Others like 
the sky, directions etc. are space only relatively and they are but a tiny 
corner in that foremost space. Vide
	"The eternal (three parts of the पुरुष  viz.नारायण ) are in the 
Heavens (Paramapada)."
	"That rests on its own greatness."
	"After (वासुदेव  and other forms) the fourth part (viz. Ani-ruddha 
by name) came out in this world."
	That thing is called space which is the cause of the comprehension 
of an object as 'this' and 'here'. And that is the gift of भगवान्  to all
the souls in bondage, the released souls, and the Ever-free souls (नित्या-s).
*236
 अनिलः The Giver of life-breath. 
	भगवान्  is called Anila since, He alone bestows the life-breath on 
all. The well-known wind is only a tiny fraction of this Anila viz. 
भगवान्
	"The wind was born out of His breath."
	"Who ever can breathe and who ever can live if the आकाश  (viz. 
परमात्मा ) were not there?"
	"The affix ilach comes after the roots 'sal', 'kal' and 'an' 
(to live). (An+ilach=anilah).
*237
 धरणीधरः The bearer of the earth.
	He bears all (like आदिशेष , भूमि etc). who bear others. Vide :-
	"He bore the Earth and the Heaven."
	"पुरुषोत्तम, by His will, created the Earth, the Interspace and 
the Heaven; being the Supreme ruler, He keeps them all under His control." 
And other texts like these.
*238
 सुप्रसादः The conferror of favours.
	He is called सुप्रसादः since, He does all good as stated above to His 
devotees who are well-disposed towards Him. Vide -
	"By the Grace of the Creator who is immensely great and who is not 
tainted by evil, the devotee becomes free from all sorrows and sees Him."
	"The two Lords (बलराम  and कृष्ण), who shower immense favour, have 
come to my hut"-(said the garland-maker)."
*239
 प्रसन्नात्मा The clear minded. 
	The reason for being सुप्रसादः is shown by this name   प्रसन्नात्मा .
भगवान्  has got all things desirable by Himself, and therefore His mind 
is not affected by desire and other things. Vide 
	"He is without hunger for food and thirst for drink, and His desires 
are true and His will also is true."
	"He is peace in its entirety and is nectar."
	"That person cannot at all be pleased who is in wants and who is a 
miser."
*240
 विश्वसृट् The creator of the Unverse. 
भगवान्  creates the Universe out of kindness unmindful of its merits or 
defects.
*241
 विश्वभुक् विभुः He who pervades all things and protects them.
	Thus भगवान्  pervades the Universe and protects it. 
(भुनक्ति-पालयति (protects.) This is one name (and not two). Vide --
	"The Omniscient भगवान्  creates the bodies, gives them names, and 
utters them."
*242
 सत्कर्ता He who honours the good. 
	He honours those who are good as a matter of course since, it is 
His habit to do good to even ordinary people who pay no attention to him. 
This is in accordance with the maxim known as 'दण्ड-अपूपिक '.
	(दण्ड-अपूपिक-न्याय  - The maxim of the stick and the cakes. Some 
cakes are kept in the kitchen at night and to drive away the rats, a stick 
also is kept beside them. When one comes and reports in the morning that 
the stick has been eaten away by the rats at night, we are naturally led 
to expect that the cakes also should have been eaten away by the rats as 
a matter of course. Since both of them have been-kept together.)
*243
 सत्कृतः He who is worshipped. 
	भगवान् is worshipped by the good. He is immensely pleased with even 
the little that is offerred to Him by them with devotion as though it is 
something great and sulted to His greatness, and feels that there is nothing that 
He can do for them in return. Vide
	"It is really wonderful. भगवान् Hari pleases all those who are 
exclusively devoted to Him; and He Himself receives with His head the 
worship offered by them to Him in accordance with the शास्त्रा-s."
	"By Sabari (the forest-woman), He (राम ) was worshipped well."
*244
 साधुः He who carries out what. 
	भगवान् is साधुः since He carries out whatever they want Him to do, for example going 
as a messenger, acting as a charioteer etc.
	"The affix 'un' comes after the roots 'kri', 'वा', 'पा', 'ji' and 'साध' 
(to accomplis). साध +u=साधुः (the literal) meaning of which is 'one 
who accomplishes the work of another.
*245
जह्नुः The concealer.
	The word 'Jahnu' has been derived from the root 'हा' (to forsake.) He 
is 'Jahnu' because He conceals His greatness from the non-devotees. This 
is the interpretation given by the Etymologists. In उद्योग पर्व It is said 
	"That Discus of the omni-present वासुदेव acts by His will for the 
benefit of the पाण्डवास्  being Invisible (to the eyes of others), O Great 
King!"
*246
नारायणो The Support of the host of souls.
	Sage व्यास  next, gives the special name of the परमात्मा, नारायण, 
who has been spoken of by the various names mentioned hitherto and also 
particularly by the उपनिषद्-s in every one of the various branches of the 
वेदा-s. This name signifies the परमात्मा  (the Supreme Being) as 
distinguished from His own other forms (i.e. Incarnations). Here are 
some वेदिक्  texts :
	"We meditate on नारायण ."
	"नारायण  is the Supreme Brahman."
	"Verily only one viz. नारायण  was there."
	"Then again there was the same नारायण ."
	"नारायण  is the eye and the object seen."
	"Then there was the celestial Deity,नारायण  ."
	The वेद  itself gives the derivation of the name नारायण a thus : 
"Whatever object there is in the Universe which is seen or heard, नारायण  
remains pervading all that, both inside and outside."
	More than this we do not say since it is something that should not 
be seen by six eyes i.e. a secret that can be known only by four eyes, 
(two eyes of the teacher on the one hand and two of the pupil on the other).
*247
नरः He who is imperishable.
	The same (i.e. the word नारायण  is explained in a mystic way by 
this name 'Narah' which means He has imperishable possessions, the sentient 
and the non-sentient (both of which are eternal by nature).
*248
 असङ्ख्येयः 
	He is Nara (the Innumerable), since the hosts of things mentioned 
above are also numberless.
*249
 अऽप्रमेयात्मा He of immeasurable nature. 
	भगवान्  is अऽप्रमेयात्मा   because He pervades inside and outside 
the numberless things which are limitless and are too numerous to be 
grasped one by one.
*250
 विशिष्टः  He who is superior.
He is of an exalted nature by Himself and has not to depend on 
any one else.
*251
 शिष्टकृत् He who makes all persons eminent.
*252
 शुचिः He who is pure.
	By His contact with others, भगवान्  makes them become endowed 
with auspicious qualities and fit to be with Him. He has an effulgence 
which is natural to Him and not bestowed on Him by others.
(Bhattar comments on these two names together and not one after 
another as in the case of other names.)
*253
 सिद्धार्थः  He who is in possession of all desirable things.
This name 'सिद्धार्थः' substantiates all that has been said about 
Him before and says that all things desirable are already with Him.
*254
 सिद्धसंङ्कल्पः He of infallible will and determination.
	Over and above what has been stated about Him. His wills are always 
true and unfailing. Since, He is independent (and not under the control 
of another), when He wishes to get anything, He attains it without fail 
at once. Vide 
	"He Whose wishes are true (i.e. always realised), and Whose wills 
are ever true (i.e. unfailingly accomplished).
*255
 सिद्धिदः  The bestower of Siddhis or superhuman powers.
	He confers superhuman power on those who strive for them by resorting 
to Himpowers like 'अणिम' (power of acquiring the size of an atom), 'garimँ' (power 
of acquiring weight, immeasurable size), etc.
	The siddhis are eight in number; 'अणिम'power of assuming the size 
of an atom; 'महिमा'-power of assuming an immeasurable size; 'लखिमा'-power
to become very light; 'गरिमा '-power to become very heavy; 'प्राप्ती'-the 
power of obtaining anything; 'प्रकाम्यम्'-irresistible will; 'इसिता ' 
superiority; 'वसिता '-subjugation.)
*256
 सिद्धिसाधनः H who makes the means as pleasant as the goal.
भगवान्  is सिद्धिसाधनः , because He makes the means (meditation on Him)
also pleasant in its process like the fruit itself. This is in line with 
the statement in the गीता :
	"Those who adopt this (discipline of devotion) which is in accordance 
with virtuous conduct and which is sweet like nectar, are exceedingly dear
to me."
*257
 वृषाही He who has the day which is Dharma auspicious.
	He is called वृषाही, because the day on which a devotee first 
approaches the Lord, is itself a day of virtue (वृष-means dharma) since, 
it is the day on which the inauguration is made for the flow of all 
auspiciousness.
	"The affix 'thach' is added to the words 'राजन् ', 'ahan' and 'sakhin' 
when standing at the end of a तत्पुरुष Compound." The name वृषी 
signifies that He has such a day of वृषा to be given to us.
	Vide :--
	"Today I am going to see the face of विष्णु which has eyes lovely like 
full-blown lotuses. Therefore my birth has become fruitful this day and 
this is an auspicious dawn for my night."
	"Nights they were (when I had no vision of भगवान् ) and days are 
these (when I am beside Him)."
	"When a person takes his stand in God who is Adrusya (invisible or 
inscrutable), then he becomes bereft of fear (i.e. संसार ).
*258
 वृषभो He who showers His grace
	He pours forth His grace on those who approach Him and who are 
scorched by the fire of संसार
	"The affix 'abhach' comes after the roots 'ruष्' (to go) and 'वृष' (to sprinkle), 
and it is treated as having 'कित् '."
*259
 विष्णुः The pervader. 
	He is विष्णुः  since He pervades (all things) showering (His grace). The 
word 'विष्णुः ' is derived from the root 'विष्ल्' (to pervade). It takes the 
suffix 'nu' as well as 'kith'.
	Here the 'व्यापती' (pervasion) is to be taken as signifying the 
'व्यापती' of the school of Tharka (Indian Logic). According to that 
school 'व्यापती' is concordance as in the case of fire and smoke. 
Wherever there is smoke, there is fire. But fire is greater, because 
it exists in places where there is no smoke e.g. a red-hot ball of iron. 
In the same way there is inseparable connection between भगवान्  and 
others, but He is greater by virtue of the diverse kinds of help He 
renders to all who are of a lower order. Vide :
"There is no object, moving or non-moving, which can exist without Me."
*260
 वृषपर्वा He who has Dharma as steps (for His attainment). 
	वृषा-s are the various dharmas that pertain to the different 
वर्णा-s and आश्रमा-s (castes and stages of life). They are like the stops 
of a ladder to reach Him. So He is वृषपर्वा 
*261
 वृषोदरः He who has righteous belly.
	भगवान्  has धर्म  itself for His belly which can be easily filled 
by the oblations acquired and offered by His worshippers; or He is 
वृषोदरः since He keeps those in distress in His belly and protects 
them, when they resort to Him.
*262
 वर्धनः He who nourishes. 
	He is called Vardhana, becauses like a mother, He keeps them in 
His womb and nourishes them.
*263
 वर्धमानः He who grows.
	He is वर्धमानः  : He grows as He makes others grow. Or His 
growth does not stop with such help only. He makes all more and more 
prosperous. 
*264
 विविक्तः He who is Unique. 
	All His activities are extra-ordinary and are superior to those 
of others in the world. So He is called विविक्तः. 
*265
 श्रुतिसागरः He who is the sea for the Vedas. 
	He is the final receptacle for all the वेदा-s which are replete 
with His qualities, delineated above and which end in Him even as the 
ocean is the last resort of the waters of the flowing rivers. Vide;
	"The वेदा-s speak only about नारायण."
	"I am the only one that is to be realised by all the वेदा-s'This 
is what कृष्ण says in the गीता . 
*266
 सुभुजः He of lofty arms. 
	भगवान्  has auspicious arms which are ever bent upon shouldering 
the burden of those that seek refuge in Him. 
*267
 दुर्धरो The irresistble. 
	By virtue of the strength of such arms.भगवान् is endowed with such
 an irresistible power like the force of the gushing waters of the great 
sea at the time of Deluge which cannot be resisted by the bridge of sand 
built by children for sport.
	"In the sense of hard and difficult, or light and easy, the affix 
'khal' is added to a verb when 'ईषद् ', 'dur' and 'su' are combined with 
it as an 'upapada' (particle). The names 'Durlabhah' (783) and 'Durgamah' 
(784) are formed similarly.
*268
 वाग्मी He Who is the worthy object of words of praise.
	He is वाग्मी  since, He has words (the वेदा-s) which are highly worthy 
of praise. The affix 'gmini' comes after the word 'वाच् ' in the sense 
of 'matup' (i.e. possession). The praise-worthiness here is due to the 
fact that He is proficient in words and is the embodiment of the वेदा-s
which bring Him success (in argument), and which are sweet, majestic, 
kind and beneficient. Vide;
	"The वेदा-s are but words expressed (by Him)."
	"He (रामा ) is proficient in giving ready replies to arguments put 
forward (by others), and in this He is like बृहस्पती , (the Lord 
of speech)."
	"Speak again; for I am not satiated by hearing such words of nectar."
	"रामा  is wise and speaks sweet words: He is the first to speak and 
also speaks kind words."
	"He narrates the episode of the भारता-s and the श्रिञ्जय-s which 
is praise-worthy, which confers happiness, which is commendable, which is 
comprehensible to those desirous of Release, and incomprehensible to the 
lifeless (who are ill-disposed)."
	"The Lotus-eyed Lord (कृष्ण) took hold of the long hand of the 
king and spoke in a voice like the thunder of a timely showering cloud, 
words which were serious, but not frightening, which were agreeable and 
clear." And so on.
*269
 महेन्द्रः he of great wealth. 
	Since, भगवान्  pervades thus on all sides, He has supreme overlordship which is 
worthy of respect and He is called Mahendra.
	The word Indra is derived from the root 'idi' (to own grea wealth). 
"The words 'rijra', 'indra' etc. are irregularly formed with the affix 
'ra'. (idi+ra=Indra).
*270
 वसुदः The Wealth-giver. 
	Even though  भगवान्  has supreme overlordship, which is unassailable 
by virtue of His being the Mahendra (the great Lord of wealth). He bestows 
the wealth on the needy even though they are insignificant people. Vide :
	"The supreme Deity confers the three worlds and Kubera the riches".
*271
 वसुः Wealth. 
	He is Vasu since He is Himself the wealth for great men as stated in 
the गीत  :
	"वासुदेव  is everything."
*272
 नैकरूपः He of multifarious forms. 
	Next the Cosmic nature of भगवान्  is dealt with which is in 
consonance with the greatness delineated above :
	भगवान् is in diverse forms as a result of which it is quite 
appropriate to His being cognised as all those things themselves.
	"The negative particle 'na' remains unchanged in 'नभ्राज ' 'नपात्' 
and other words". The words given in this rule are only by way of an 
example and so the word 'नैकरूप ' also may be included in that list. 
Or it may come under the rule that the negative particle has two 
alternative forms, one as 'na' and the other as 'a'. Here 'na' 
remains in the same form. The word 'नैक-माय' (303) also comes 
under this rule.
	The Manthra for His meditation is "Unto Him of multifarious forms."
	"I see Thee everywhere with Thy endless forms".
*273
 बृहद्रूपः He of an immense form.
	Every one of these forms of His is so big as to prevade the space 
in all the quarters and the sky. So He is बृहद्रूपः. Vide :
	"By Thee alone is pervaded the interspace between the Earth 
and the Heaven as well as all the directions."
*274
 शिपिविष्टः He Who pervades the rays.
	'Sipi' means rays and 'विष्टः ' means 'has entered'. He has 
pervaded all the rays.
	Yaska in his Niruktha says : "Sipayah are said to signify the 
'rays', and they have entered into Him."
	There is also a similar interpretation by the ancients :
	"The meaning of the word ' शिपिविष्टः' is : He has tawny hairs 
on His body; with that body He has pervaded all other things. So He 
is ' शिपिविष्टः ".
	In the उद्योग पर्व (महाभारत)
	"That is ' शिपिविष्टः ' which enters into the pores of the body 
like the rays of the Sun."
	"Thy powerful rays are filling the whole Universe and are burning it."
*275
 प्रकाशनः  He who shows.
	भगवान् shows this celestial form to Arjuna and others who long 
to see it. So He is called प्रकाशनः . Vide :
	"I shall give you a divine eye . See the sovereign powers I am 
endowed with."
	"This form of Mine you have seen which is very difficult to see." 
*276
 ओजस्तेजो-द्युतिधरः  He who endowed with strenght, vigour and 
      brilliance.
	'ओजस् ' signifies strength; 'तेजस् ' means reputation or power to 
overcome enemies; and 'Dyuthi' is effulgence. Since, Bhagavँn alone has 
all these. He is 'ओजस्तेजो-द्युतिधरः'. This is one name.
	"Just as moths with accelerated speed enter a blazing fire for 
their own destruction. (so too these men enter Thy mouth with great 
velocity for their destruction)."
	"O हृषीकेश  I ( कृष्ण I) Quite properly does the world rejoice at 
Thy reputation (and is drawn towards Thee)."
	"If the effulgence of a thousand Suns were to rise up simultaneously 
in the sky, (then it would be somewhat like the splendour of that Mighty 
One (श्री  कृष्ण )" (Sanjaya said.) And so on. 
*277
 प्रकाशात्मा He of a nature that is well known to all.
	His supreme power is admitted even by fools. So He is प्रकाशात्मा
धृतराष्ट्र  also says the same
	"O Lotus-eyed Lord! Thou art the master of the entire Universe. 
Therefore Thou shouldst take pity on me, O the Chief of the यादवास् !"
*278
 प्रतापनः He who scroches.
*279
 ऋद्धः He Who is plentiful and magnificient. 
	भगवान्  is ऋद्धः (plentiful) like the ocean on a full-moon day 
which submerges even the shore (with its rising waves).
	In the उद्योग पर्व  it is said :
	"Then that foremost person among all men spoke again words that 
were divine and wonderful, artistic and magnificent." 
*280
 स्पष्टाक्षरो He of clear words. 
 	The letters of the words (and words) of the वेदा-s have been
made clear by virtue of this magnificence which is the topic of those 
वेदा-s. 
*281
 मन्त्रः The mystic word.
	The etymologists interpret the word thus : "तन्मन्तारं त्रायते इति मन्त्रः" Manthra 
is that which protects him who meditates on it."
	In the Brahma पुराण in the context of the praise of भगवान्  to 
drive away the wicked, Sage नारद  puts the following question to भगवान्  : "O मधुसूदन 
! Who can remember Thee at that time when his life departs?" The reply of भगवान्  is :
	"He, who thinks of me always, will certainly cross this vast and 
frightful sea of संसार  which is filled with the waters of greed and 
avarice."
	(The वराह -charama श्लोक also says) 
	"The man who, when his mind is in its normal condition, when the 
body is not shattered, and when the elementary constituents of the body 
(धातू-s) are in perfect equipoise, meditates on me who have the world 
as My body and who am not subject to births due to Karmawhen that man 
lies like a log of wood or a piece of stone in his dying moments, I 
think of (him) My devotee and lead him to attain the Supreme Abode. 
*282
 चन्द्रांशुः He who is possessed of effulgent rays like those 
of the moon.
	 भगवान्  possesses an effulgence which dispels the distress of 
the meditators and fills them with joy.  So He is called 'चन्द्रांशुः'. 
Vide :
	"The sages in the forest saw रामा  who was like the rising moon." 
And so on.The word 'chandra' is derived from the root 'chad' (to delight). 
"The affix 'rak' comes after (thirty-two) roots beginning with 'स्पायी', 
'thanchi', and 'chadi', 'Chandra' is formed according to this rule. 
*283
 भास्करद्युतिः He who has the refulgence of the sun. 
	भगवान्  is endowed with a brilliance which easily throws others in 
the shade. So He is  भास्करद्युतिःi. Vide :
	"The frightened राक्षसा-s melt away in all directions."
	"O Monkey (Hanuman)! The Sun-like रामा, who is valiant and who has 
heaps of ray-like arrows, will certainly dry up the water viz. The 
inimical राक्षसा-s."
	Here is a slओka which describes भगवान्  both as the formidable 
Sun and the delightful moon :
	"This Lord श्री कृष्ण, who is the ruler of all the worlds, is 
thus a source of terror to the असुरा-s and of protection to the gods 
on all sides." 
*284
 अमृतांशूद्भवः The source of the nectar-rayed moon. 
	The moon has got rays of nectar which dispel all heat which nourish 
the plants and which bring back to life even the dead. The moon has 
acquired this quality because of her close contact with the mind of 
भगवान्  which has coolness and other lovable qualities.
	The वेदिc Manthra says : "The Moon was born out of the mind of 
महा पुरुष  (i.e. भगवान् नारायण )." 
*285
 भानुः The lustrous Sun.
	भगवान् is भानुः, because He has an effulgence by acquiring 
which even the thousand-rayed bright sun shines.
	"The Sun has taken the effulgence of भगवान् and shines".
*286
 शशबिन्दुः He who disowns the evil-minded.
	Similarly He is  शशबिन्दुः. He disowns those who go in the wrong path.
The word 'Sasi' is derived from the root  'शश' (to jump 
or swerve from the right path); and 'bindu' from 'bidi' (to disown). 
The words 'bindu' and 'icchu' have been irregularly formed and end 
with the affix 'u'. 
*287
 सुरेश्वरः The lord of gods.
	Similarly भगवान्  is the Lord of those who go in the right path. 
This is in consonance with the saying :
	"Whatever is crooked (in conduct) leads to death (संसार ); 
whatever is straight leads to the attainment of Brahman." 
*288
 औषधं The medicine. 
By virtue of His power to remove the great poison viz, संसार , भगवान्  
is called 'औषधं '. Vide :
	"The gods and the celestial sages know Him to be the remedy for 
distress."
	"O भगवान् ! Thou alone art verily the recipe for the संसार, 
which (recipe) can be obtained by the high price of the concentration 
of the mind on Thee." 
*289
 जगतः सेतुः The barrier of universe.
	भगवान्  is called 'जगतः सेतुः', because He is the barrier which 
keeps apart the mixing up of the good and the bad. Vide :
	"He is the bridge that supports all the worlds so that they may not 
get into confusion."
	It is because of this there is no occasion for the attainment of 
fruit for actions not begun or for the non-attainment of fruits for 
actions completed.
	"Just as the calf recognises and reaches its mother in the midst 
of a thousand cows, similarly, the effect of an act committed previously 
by a person goes to him."
	"The  doer of good deeds obtains happiness, whereas the doer of 
sinful acts obtains sin and suffers from it." 
*290
 सत्य-धर्म-पराक्रमः He whose qualities and valour are true.
	Here 'Dharma' signifies the auspicious qualities of भगवान् , and 
'पराक्रम' His exploits. All of them are always true and never go in vain. 
So He is सत्य-धर्म-पराक्रमः 
	Beginning to speak of the qualities and acts of कृष्ण, Arjuna says 
in the गीत  : "O कृष्ण! I consider all that you tell me to be true."
	"विष्णु  has prowess that is true and unfailing."
	"In वाका-s and अनुवाका-s, निषाद्-s and उपनिषद्-s, as well as in the true 
 Sama Hymns, they declare that His acts are ever true, and He is Truth 
itself."
	(The वाका,अनुवाक  etc, refer to the different sections and 
chapters of the Veda.) 
*291
 भूतभव्यभवन्नाथः The lord of all in the past, future and present.
	He is the master and overlord of all things not only in the present, 
but at all timespast, present and future. Vide :
	"केशव, the Slayer of केशि (the Asura) and the Lord of the past, 
present and future, is the refuge for all the वृष्णी-s (the cow-herds of 
वृन्दावन् ), their Protector in times of danger, and also the destroyer 
of their enemies".
*292
 पवनः  He Who moves about (Wind)
	भगवान्  is called पवन since by nature He moves about in all places
 and at all times. The wind (the bearer of fragrance) is called 
'sathatha-gathi' (constant wanderer) because it has just a fraction of 
this quality of भगवान् .
The word 'pavanah' is derived from the root 'pavi' (to move  about
*293
 पावनः The purifier. 
	He is पावन  since, He makes the Ganga and the like that are 
connected with Him purify the world. Agasthya says to राम .
	"O the Scion of the Raghu race I, Thou alone art the purifier of 
all the worlds." 
*294
 अनलः  He Who is insatiate.
	Even though भगवान्  has thus done good in several ways, still He 
is insatiate. (Analah). Such is the greatness of His benevolence. He is 
the god who is never tired of doing good. The fire in the world is called 
'anala' (insatiate) only because of the possession of a particle of this 
great quality of being insatiable (by fuel).
	"Like the fire that grows by the sacrificial offerings, He grows 
more and more." 
*295
 कामहा The destroyer of desires. 
	भगवान् 's name is कामहा , because He destroys the desires for 
worldly pleasures of those who have realised the nature of His qualities 
as described above.
	"My mind is free from the stain of desires. So it has secured a 
place at Thy feet." These are the words of those that have realised Him.
	"One who is well-versed in the वेदा-s and not vitiated by desires 
(attains the Bliss of Brahman)."
	"Desirous of attaining Whom (भगवान् ), they practise celibacy."
*296
 कामकृत् The creator of desirable things.
	Moreover He creates objects fit to be enjoyed here, salvation etc. 
So He is कामकृत् . 
*297
कान्तः  He who is charming.
	He is कान्तः (fascinating by the qualities of His body like loveliness 
and delicacy. The word 'कान्तः' is the past participle of the root 'kam' 
(to desire). The penultimate letter 'a' of 'kam' is lengthened by the rule 
which says "The penultimate vowel of a root ending with a nasal becomes 
long when followed by the affix 'kvip' and before an affix having an 
indicatory 'ka' or 'gn' which begins with a consonant other than a 
semi-vowel or nasal. (kam+tha=कान्तः). 
*298
 कामः The Lovable or Manmatha.
	भगवान्  is also extremely lovable by virtue of His innate qualities 
like amiability, generosity and compassion. By an iota of this quality, 
Manmattha, the god of love, maddens the whole world. 
*299
 कामप्रदः  The grantor of wishes.
	He grants, according to their desert, the desires of those who wiढ 
to have Him and also of those who are after trifles. Vide :
	"The One Who fulfils the desires of the many."
	"The affix 'ka' comes after a root having the form of 'दा' and 
'ज्ञा' when taking the preposition 'pra' and in composition with a word 
in the Accusative case.
	The name 'Vasupradah' (698 and 699) also has been similarly formed.
*300
 प्रभुः He who is powerful.
	By His extreme loveliness He has the the supreme power to attract 
the minds of all towards Himself. Vide :
	"राम, with His eyes lovely like the lotus-petals, draws towards 
Himself the minds of all beings."
