*501
 शरीरभूतभृत् The bearer of the Tattvas as his bodies.
	भगवान्  is शरीर भूतभृत् , because He supports all the 
तत्वा-s (or Reals) which are (twenty-four in number) all of which are 
His bodies.
	"That is His head."
	"His head was the Sky along with the stars and the deities." Beginning 
from this श्लोक  the whole passage may be studied, the last श्लोक  of which 
is as follows:
	"His head was the Sky along with the stars and the deities." 
Beginning from this श्लोक  the whole passage may be studied, the last 
slओka of which is as follows:
	"Assuming the head of a horse and surrounded by diverse forms."
*502
 भोक्ता The Enjoyer.
	"The great face of the horse that was described by you before 
pertains to विष्णु  Who consumes the Havya and कव्य  and Who is in the 
North-east Ocean."
	He is भोक्ता.
	(हव्यन्  oblation or offering to the gods.
	काव्यन्  oblation of food to deceased ancestors).
*503
 कपीन्द्रो The Lord of the monkeys.
	Then in times of yore भगवान्  came as राम  to promote the 
performance of sacrificial acts laid down in the वेदा-s which were 
rescued and taught by Him before (as हयग्रीव ). When He incarnated 
Himself as राम  playfully assuming a human body which was entirely 
different from His own essential nature. He was the Indra for the 
gods who were his servitors and who had assumed the forms  of monkays 
which were different in a greater degree to their nature. So Bhagavँn 
is called कपीन्द्र .
	"Desirous of doing good to the people. The Lord of the Universe 
Himself came as राम and He was surrounded and waited upon by gods who 
had taken the forms of monkeys."
*504
 भूरिदक्षिणः The giver of liberal remunerations. In order 
to instruct  the world by example He himself as master conducted many sacrifices
such as Asvamedha and others in which gifts were liberally given.
	In order to instruct the world by example He himself as the master 
conducted many sacrifices such as अश्वमेध  and others in which gifts were 
liberally given. So He is भूरिदक्षिणः .
	"After having performed hundreds of horse-sacrificesॏ.. ( राम  would 
return to the world of Para Brahman)."
*505
 सोमपः The drinker of the Soma (juice).
	In those sacrifices, श्री राम  drank the juice of the सोम  plant.
	( सोम Name of a plant the most important ingredient in ancient 
sacrificial offerings.)
*506
 अमृतपः The drinker of Ambrosia.
	"Whatever oblation is offered in sacrifices as prescribed in the 
वेदा-s along with the recitation of the मन्त्रs, the god of fire 
transforms it into Ambrosia and gives in to विष्णु .".
"Indeed I am the enjoyer in all sacrifices and also the master 
(who bestows the fruits thereof)."
	भगवान्  is Amrutha-pah since He drinks the Nectar into which 
shape the sacrificial offering has been transformed.
	Or Amritha-pah can be interpreted as the Protector of Amritha. 
भगवान्   Himself is the Amrutha and He protects it for the enjoyment 
in the Transcendental World for those who follow the path shown by Him 
in the discharge of daily duties. (Here the enjoyment of भगवान्  is 
taken as Nectar).
	"In the third world where the देवाs drink the nectar and shine."
	"He is the bridge for the Amrutha." (i.e. the procurer of nectar).
	"Whose shadow is Ambrosia."
*507
 सोमः The nectar.
	'He is सोम , because He is sweet like nectar not only to Himself, 
but also to those who enjoy Him. The word 'सोम ' signifies nectar.
	"In the Heavens, the third world from this Earth, there was सोम  
(nectar)."
	"He is indeed like Ambrosia."
	"राम ! By great austerities and by highly virtuous acts. Thou hast 
been obtained by King Dasarattha like the nectar by the gods."
	"Those who saw जनार्दन  did not become satiate on seeing Him like 
those who taste the nectar."
	"(Brahman is) replete with tranquility and immortal (Amrutha)".
*508
 पुरुजित् The Conqueror of many.
	He is Purujith since He conquers all (as stated by वाल्मीकि )
	"राम  conquers people by truthfulness, the poort by gifts, the 
elders by service, and being a warrior He conquers His enemies with the 
bow."
*509
 पुरुसत्तमः He who remains with the great.
भगवान्  is पुरुसत्तमः , because He ever remains with great 
devotees like हनुमान्  and others who are always desirous of drinking 
the ocean of His nectar-like qualities Vide :
	"O King (राम )! My love for Thee is very great and it is firmly 
planted in Thee. O Warrior! My devotion to Thee is even more steady. 
I cannot think of going anywhere else (leaving this world where Thou 
hast enslaved me)." (हनुमान्  )
	"O Warrior! As long as the story of राम  stands in this world".
*510
 विनयः The subduer.
	Even मारीच  and others are being subdued by राम  by His qualities 
such as valour etc. So He is Vinaya.
*511
 जयः He who is conquered.
	He is conquered (i.e. made submissive) by those who have resorted 
to Him. Theefore He is Jayah. Vide :
	"I am to be commanded by sages (i.e. I am at their disposal)."
	"Then by the great gods नारायण  was directed."
*512
 सत्यसंधः He whose promises are true. 
His promises to them are always true (i.e. carried out). So He is 
Sathya-sandhah. (Sathya=true, संन्धा =promise).
O  सीता ! I would rather give up My life or even you as well as 
लक्षमण . But never will I break My promise, especially that which has 
been made to the Brahmins."
	"He is ever true to His word and has His senses under control."
*513
 दाशार्हः He who deserves the gifts.
	'दास ' is gift. He is दाशार्हः , because He is fit to receive the 
gifts by the devotees of their own selves or fit for surrendering His 
own self to them.
	Or taken with reference to भगवान् श्री कृष्ण , the name दाशार्हः  
may be interpreted as the descendant of दाशार्हः  (i.e. यादवा  Clan).
The affix 'ach' comes after the verb 'arh' (to respect) when the 
object is in composition with it.
	The word 'Mahatha' (525) and others also come under this rule.
the quality of Saththva. 'सात्वता ' signifies the act of the person or 
the Scripture that is followed by him. सात्वता s are the भागवता-s. 
Their Lord is सात्वताम पतिः . By this derivation the meaning of the 
following श्लोक  is suggested :
	"O the Chief of the सात्वता -s ! I created the सात्वता- s who 
perform their acts with a spirit of non-attachment to their fruits in a 
dedicated way. Since I am realised by those endowed with such knowledge. 
I am Myself a सात्वता ."
Or the यादवा-s are called सात्वता s, and being their Lord, 
भगवान  is सात्वता पतिः .
The affix 'nich' has been added to form the word 'सात्वता ' in the 
sense of 'he does' or 'says'.
	"The last vowel with consonant, if any, that follows it, is elided 
when the affixes 'ishta', 'iman' and 'ईया-s' follow.
*514
 सात्वतां पतिः The Lord of the Saatvats.
	'Sath' is the Supreme Brahman or the quality of  सात्व .
	"The affix 'mathup' comes after a word in the first case in 
construction in the sense of 'whose it is' or 'in whom it is.'
	"The letter 'va' is substituted for 'ma' in 'mathup' when the 
word so formed is a Noun."
	"The word-form ending in 'th' or in 's' is called 'bha' when an 
affix with the force of 'mathup' (whose it is or in whom it is) follows."
	'सात्वान् ' is one who knows Brahman or one who is possessed of 
*515
 जीवः He who makes them alive. 
	He gives life to the भगवान्  by preventing them from commiting 
acts that will bring about their ruin and makes them lead a life of Bliss 
by doing service to Him. Vide :
	"भगवान्  is the very embodiment of Beatitude and is worsipped by 
all the three worlds. O Devi! He cannot bear to see His devotees suffer."
*516
 विनयिता The Saviour.He protects them with love and affection 
       as princes.
*517
 साक्षी The Observer. 
In order to protect them He is always closely observing them. 
So He is called साक्षी. 
*518
 मुकुन्दः The salvation-giver. 
	He bestows the World of Release on them when they pray to Him for it 
with supreme and single-minded devotion.
	"From the two words 'मुक्तिं ददीती i', the word 'Mukunda' has 
been irregularly formed under the 'प्रिषोदर' rule.
	(Note : The elision and mutation and augment of letters to be 
seen in प्रिषोदर  and other words, though not found in treatises on 
Grammar, are valid to that extent and n the mode as taught by the 
usage of the sages.
	(The word 'Hamsa' is formed by the augment of a letter 
(sa after han); 'Simha' from 'hims' by the transposition of the 
letter; 'गूढात्म ' by mutation of letters and प्रिषोदर  by the 
disappearance of letters).
*519
 अमितविक्रमः He of boundless valour.
	He is endowed with supreme power to be the supporter of all 
Realities such as Prakruthi and others, which (power) is the object 
of meditation, worship and contemplation of His devotees. So He is 
Amitha-vikrama.
	Vide in Paushkara :
	"He is time, Fire; He lies on various objects and lives in 
the Nether-worlds; He is without form and is all-pervasive. He is 
known by the name of  आधार-शक्ति  (the power that is the supporter 
of all Realities). He assumes whatever form He likes and therefore 
is in divers forms."
*520
 अम्भोनिधिः He who has placed Himself under the waters. 
	He has kept His form as a Tortoise in the waters of the पाताळलोक  
as the base plank to support the entire Universe.
	Here is the Manthra about Him in this form :
	"Unto Him of unlimited power and strength Who supports the worlds 
in the form of a Tortoise."
*521
अनन्तात्मा The inner Soul of Ananta. 
	On that कूर्म  He stands as the Iner Soul of Anantha, the 
serpent-king, who is the pillar that bears the Universe.
	In श्री  Jaya (Akhya Samhitha) it is said :
	"One must place in his meditation on the आधार शक्ति  (the  
embodiment of all-supporting power), the Lord of Anantha Who is flawless, 
Who possesses and effulgent body, Who is surrounded by hundreds of flames 
and Who bears in His hands Sankha, Chakra and गदा "
	"Him who has in his hands the discus and the ploughshare and 
who bows before Him; when compared with Whom all other great  gods 
are inferior."
*522
 महोदधिशयः He who is reclining in the vast ocean.
	The same Lord at the time of the final deluge, lies on the 
couchlike serpent-body of Anantha in that ocean.
	"The affix 'ach' comes after the verb 'si' (to lie down) when 
in composition with a case-inflected word indicating location, in the 
Locative case."
	'Bhu:-sayah' (634 and other such names also are formed under this 
rule.
*523
 अन्तकः  He who brings about the end of all.
	He is called Anthaka because He causes the end of all things.
	The affix 'nvul' has been added to indicate the causal form of the 
verb in 'he does.'
	"At the time of the end of the world, Thou art soon on the आदि शेष  
in the waters of the deep."
	Vide in the वैष्णव पुराण  :
	"(भगवान् संकर्षण  as) शेष  lies at the bottom of the 
Nether-worlds being worshipped by all the gods."
	"Who can describe His valour on whose head this entire Earth 
rendered red by the lustre of the sparking gems of His hoods shines 
like a garland of flowers."
	"The गन्धर्वा-s and the अप्सरा-s, the किन्नरा-s and सिद्धा-s, and 
the great उरग-s none of them can reach the end of (the greatness of) 
His qualities. So He is called Anantha."
	"His valour and greatness, essential nature and form cannot be 
known or described even by gods."
	"At the end of the Kalpa (aeon), from his mouths comes out rudra 
with संकर्षण  as His आत्मा glowing with the flames of the poisonous 
fire and he consumes the three worlds.". And texts like these.
*524
 अजः He who is signified by the letter A. 
	भगवान्  is to be meditated upon as being signified by the letter 
'a' which is the origin of the प्रणव  and as being at the head of all 
Realities. He is Aja, because He appears in our knowledge as being 
indicated by the letter 'a'.
	"नारायण  is the Supreme Lord Who occupies the highest place amongst 
all the तत्वा-s (Realities) and Who is signified by the letter 'a' which 
is the origin for the word प्रणव  (i.e. ॐकार ) (which is invariably 
pronounced at the beginning of the recitation of the Veda and which has 
also a definite place at the end of the recitation)."
	परमात्म  is the twenty-sixth and the highest Reality signified 
by the letter, 'a'. जीवात्म  is the twenty-fifth तत्वा  and is 
signified by the letter 'm'. The other twenty-four तत्वा s are 
non-sentient and they are : Prakruthi (the Primordial Matter), Mahath, 
अहंकार , the mind, the five organs of sense (ज्ञानेन्द्रिया eye, ear, 
tongue, nose and skin), the five organs of action (कर्मेन्द्रियs hands, 
legs, the organs of speech, of excretion and of generation in men and 
women; the five तन्मात्राs sound, touch, form, taste and smell; and 
the five elements ether, air, fire water and earth. These twenty four 
तत्वाs are signified by the twenty-four consonants respectively 
beginning with 'k' and ending with 'bh').
*525
 महार्हः He who is worthy of worship.
	Amongst these तत्वा-s, भगवान्  is the Superior तत्वा Who is 
to be worshipped by means of the प्रणव  and by offering one's soul to Him.
(Maham means worship).
	"The great secret which the gods are keeping as taught by the great 
Upanishad is that the जीव  is to be offered to भगवान् , the Supreme 
Brahman by means of the प्रणव , (in which the first letter 'a' 
signifies परमात्मा  and the last letter 'm'जीवात्म.)". "To Thee, 
the ब्रह्मन्  of great effulgence, by the Manthra 'ॐ' (I offer myself)."
*526
 स्वाभाव्यः He who is to be meditated upon by those who belong to him.
	Thus by this Manthra (viz. प्राणव ), all the souls, which are His 
property, should inevitably meditate upon Him with love, he being the Master 
of all of them.
	"If you desire the highest goal of life and the means of attaining it 
you should understand clearly that you are the servant and that ईश्वर  is 
the Master and that this relationship is eternal and a natural one".
	"There is no other reason for the Supreme Being to be the ruler 
of the Universe."
	Or He is स्वाभाव्य , because the relationship between the Lord and 
the souls as Master and servant is eternal and natural and must be 
meditated upon as such.
	"The affix 'nyath' comes after a root that ends in the letter 'u' 
long or short, when the sense is that of necessity.
*527
 जितामित्रः The Conqueror of the foes.
	Egotism, the feeling that all things are mine (and not God's), and 
the desires in the devotees are enemies (amithra) for the understanding 
of the secret delineated above. भगवान्  vanquishes all of them for the 
benefit of His devotees. So He is जितामित्रते  Conqueror of the foes. 
This is a well-known fact that desires and the like are the enemies.
	श्री कृष्ण reveals this fact to Arjuna in the भगवत् गीत a in 
six श्लोका-s the first and the last of which read thus :
	"This (cause of sin) is desire as well as anger born from the 
Guखa called Rँjँs."
	"O long-armed Arjuna! Put an end to this invincible enemy namely 
काम  (desire)."
*528
 प्रमोदनः He who delights. 
	Those who are connected with Him experience a joy when they think 
of this fact that their enemies (desire and anger) have been vanquished 
by भगवान् . So He is प्रामोदन  (the Joy-giver).
	The Kapila Incarnation of भगवान् .
*529
 आनन्दः He who is Bliss .
	Next the Incarnation of भगवान्  as Kapila is dealt with.
	भगवान्  is called आनन्द  because He is endowed with a Bliss which 
is beyond the region of thought and word and about the greatness of which 
a detailed investigation has been made in the आनन्द -valli ( section of 
the तैतरीय  Upanishad) and conclusion arrived at.
	"The affix 'ach' (a) comes after the words 'arsa' etc. in the sense
 of 'mathup' (i.e. possession).
*530
 नन्दनः  The Blis-giver. भगवान्  confers that Bliss on the 
Released souls in the state of release described above and makes them happy.
	In this way innumerable objects of enjoyment are in great abundance 
in Him. So He is Nandah.
	"The affix 'ghajn' comes after a case-inflected word indicating 
location. (i.e. in the Locative Case)."
*531
नन्दः He who is replete (with things bliss ful)
	भगवान्   is noted for His uprightness towards His devotees from the 
time they begin to approach Him up to the time of their attainment of Him.
 So He is सत्य- धर्म .
*532
सत्यधर्मा He is true in His acts.
	By this superior greatness of His, भगवान्  pervades through the 
three वेदा-s as their main topic. So He is called Thrivikrama. Vide :
	"Triad is the term by which the three वेदा-s are referred to by 
the great seers. Thou traversest all the three of them (by Thy greatness) 
and so Thou art known by the name of Thrivikrama."
	"In praise of Whom all the वेदा-s speak in one voice."
	"नारायण is the main topic dealt with by the वेदा-s."
*533
 त्रिविक्रमः He who traverses or pervades the three Vedas.
	भगवान्  is महर्षिः  since (in His incarnation as Kapila) He realised 
the three वेदा-s by intuitive perception as detailed above.
	"One should think of Him as speaking through his mouths the ruk and 
other वेदा-s." This is the way in which he is to be meditated upon.
	"Kapila, who was a seer from his very birth."
	"He is the propounder of the संख्या System and is spoken of as 
the Great Seer."
*534
 महर्षिः The great seer. He is Mahaeshih since he realised the 
three Vedas by intutive perception as detailed above.
	भगवान्  is महर्षिः  since (in His incarnation as Kapila) He 
realised the three वेदा-s by intuitive perception as detailed above.
	"One should think of Him as speaking through his mouths the ruk and 
other वेदा-s." This is the way in which he is to be meditated upon.
	"Kapila, who was a seer from his very birth."
	"He is the propounder of the संख्या  System and is spoken of as the 
Great Seer."
*535
 कपिलाचार्यः He who is 'Kapila' (of brown complexion) and also 
an Acharya (teacher)
	He is of brown (kapila) complexion and a Teacher (आचार्य).
	Here is the form in which He has to be meditated upon :
	"He Who is possessed of a lustre like the burning and smokeless ember, and has Sankha 
and Padma beads in his hand."
	He is आचार्य , because He has collected together all the knowledge 
with regard to the तत्वा-s (Realities) pertaining to his system of 
Philosphy. The Manthra describing Him says :
	"To Him Who spread the knowledge of His system."
	The word Kapila is derived from the root 'Kabr' (to colour).
	"The affix 'ilach' comes after the verb 'Kam' (to desire) or 'Kabr' (to colour) 
and the 'm' or 'br' is changed to 'p' (Kam+ilach=Kapila).
*536
 कृतज्ञः He who remembers the good deed done.
	The sons of King सागर  had offended the Sage Kapila by whom they were
 reduced to ashes. But later when Amsuman, the grandson of सागर  came
 before Kapila and bowed before him with respect, Kapila remembered only 
that good act. So he is called Kruthagjna. Kapila was not only pleased with
 the virtuous act of Amsuman, but also wanted to confer a boon on him. 
So he said to him, "Choose a boon."
	"Amsuman approached Kapila and bowing before him with respect praised 
him. Then Lord Kapila said to Him. "Choose a boon."
*537
 मेदिनीपतिः The lord of the Earth.
	"All the Earth belongs to the omniscient Lord वासुदेव . Taking the 
form of Kapila, He always bears the Earth."
	(These are the words of Brahma to the gods in the रामायण .)
*538
 त्रिपदः The propounder of the three Tattvas.
	He is known as Thri-pada since, He has the three तत्वा-s which 
are to be revealed to the world. The three तत्वा-s  are भोक्ता  (the 
enjoyer, the individual soul), भोग्य  (the object of enjoyment, the 
non-sentient matter), and the ruler ( ईश्वर ). Vide :
	"Having assumed the form of Kapila, I am going to reveal the three 
Realities for the benefit of all beings in the worldthe three तत्वा-s 
namely प्राधान (non-sentient matter). पुराण  (the जीव ), and परमात्वा .
	Or the name Thripada signifies the प्रणव  which has three words 
which denote Him. (The three letters A U M of the प्रणव  are treated as 
three words.)
	Or Thripada refers to वराह-अवतार 
	"I assumed the form of वराह  (Boar) and had three humps."
*539
 त्रिदशाध्यक्षः The saviour of the gods.
	भगवान् is the friend of Brahma and other gods in distress at the 
time of deluge.
	(Thri-दश Three times ten, i.e. thirty. The word 'Thridasa' 
signifying thirty gods in round number actually refers to the thirty-three 
gods, (not including Brahma, विष्णु  and Siva), the twelve आदित्या, the 
eight वासु , the eleven रुद्रा-s and the two Asvins.)
*540
 महाशृङ्गः The big-tusked Varaha.
	He has a large tusk to the tip of which the Earth is sticking.
	"Thou art the single-tusked वराह  (incarnation as Boar)."
	"O Lord! This entire Earth having its place at the tip of Thy tusk, 
appears like the leaf of a lotus-pond (of sport)."
*541
 कृतान्तकृत् He who slew him who was like Yama.
	भगवान् is कृतान्त-कृत् , since He killed हिरण्याक्ष  who was like 
Yama. Vide :
	"The great Asura, हिरण्याक्ष  was killed by Him".
	Or He is कृतान्त-कृत्  since, He has prociaimed His code of 
conduct (of protecting those who seek refuge in Him) in the वराह-स्मृति 
and वराह-पुराण . (कृतान्त-सिद्धान्त  doctrine).
*542
 महावराहः The Great Boar.
	"The great वराहः भगवान् , Who has eyes like full-blown lotuses 
and the complexion like that of blue-lotus petal, lifted the Earth from 
the रसतल  (Nether-world) by His tusk and emerged as a great blue 
mountain."
*543
 गोविन्दः He who rescued the Earth.
	"The Earth had disappeared in time of yore and was secreted in a cave. I rescued 
Her. So I am known as 'गोविन्दा'(Go=Earth, Vinsa=rescuer).
*544
 सुषेणः He who is equipped with an efficient army-like body.
	Another secret is revealed here with reference to भगवान्  in His 
Transcendent Form. He has a charming body which is composed of Suddha 
Saththva and which is delineated by the पन्चोपनिषद् मन्त्रा-s. This 
body is like a powerful army to Him since, it helps Him to conquer the 
souls in bondage, the souls released and the Eternal Angels. As His body 
serves Him as a सुषेण  (good army), He is called सुषेण .
*545
 कनकाङ्गदी He who is adorned by armlets of gold.
	भगवान्  is ever adorned by celestial ornaments of which the armlets 
mentioned here are but an example. These ornaments also are composed of 
that celestial matter (Suddha Saththva) which set off the beauty of the 
body described earlier. The word 'Kanaka' in कनकाङ्गदी  is only  
suggestive of the unique and fine substances which are of a transcendental 
nature and are different from the material of this world which is 
composed of the three गुमाs सत्व ,रजस्  and तमs.
	The suffix 'ini' at the end of the word 'कनकाङ्गदी ' indicates the 
constant association of those ornaments of gold with the परमात्म.
*546
 गुह्यः He who is concealed. 
	H is called Guhya since, He is concealed by virtue of the possession 
of a body composed of the celestial materials which fact is revealed by 
the great Upanishads referred to as पञ्चोपनिषद् earlier.
	(Just as the material body in this world is composed of the 
पञ्च-भूता-s (five elements), the bodies of the परमात्मा and others 
in श्री वैकुण्ठ are composed of fine celestial things composed of 
Suddha-saththva known as पञ्चशक्तीs and which are indicated by the 
five मन्त्र-बीजाs which go by the name of पञ्चोपनिषद्s.
	It has to be said that the affix 'ya' is added optionally after 
the roots 'sams' 'duh' and 'guh'.
*547
 गभीरः He  who is deep or mysterious.
	He is deep because of His inscrutable and superior nature which is 
revealed by the पञ्चोपनिषद्s  (mentioned earlier). By coming into contact 
with Him even the bound souls, defiled by the beginningless Nescience, 
become clean like the muddy water which becomes clean by its contact with 
the 'kataka' seed. Such being the case, need it be said that भगवान्  Who 
is ever effulgent by nature will be more so.
	The words 'गभीर ' and 'गम्भीर ' have been formed irregularly. The 
affix 'ंran comes after the root 'गाः', the 'm' or which is changed to 'oh'.
Optionally the root receives the augment 'num'.
*548
 गहनः The unfathomable.
	The ocean cannot be said to be knee-deep even though one is able to 
see things on its bed because of the clear water which is translucent. 
(In the same way परमात्मा cannot be fully understood even though His 
qualities are understood to a certain extent by the Upanishads).
*549
 गुप्तः He who is hidden. 
	He is kept concealed by the earlier आचार्य who were aware of His 
greatness by His Grace.
*550
 चक्रगदाधरः The bearer of the DIscus and Mace.
	Where and in what manner has He been concealed?
	रामायण  says only this much about the Superior nature of परमात्मा : "The Creator 
is far beyond the region of तमस्  (i.e. Prakruthi-mandala) and He bears the Conch, 
the Discus and the Mace."
	The same is repeated here as Chakra गदा धरः . It does clearly 
declare that His weapons are etenal and celestial by nature and are 
composed of the divine material called Pancha-sakthi in the same way as 
He has a body and ornaments, eternal and celestial by nature.
*551
 वेधाः The providence.
In this way भगवान्  always provides (His devotees) with great, 
unlimited and varied objects of splendour. So His name is Providence 
(वेदः ).
"The Supreme Being is in the region beyond the Universe of matter 
(Thamas)."
"The affix 'as' comes after the root 'धा ' (to hold) preceded by 
'vi'; and 'विधा' is replaced by 'वेधा '.
	(vi+धा+asi=वेधा+asi=वेधाः.)
*552
 स्वाङ्गः He who has the marks of sovereignty which are his own.
	In that place He eternally has all the paraphernalia (marks of 
Sovereignty) like the umbrella, the चामर  and other things indicative 
of His sovereignty which are His own and unique.
*553
 अजितः He who has the city Ajitaa by name
	He has a city which is composed of that celestial matter 
(Suddha-saththva) and which is not under the sway of birth and death
that pertain to the material world of Prakruthi, and which goes by the 
name of 'अजिता '. So He is called 'Ajithah'. Or 
	"The affix 'ach' is added after 'arsa' and other words."
*554
 कृष्णः The dark hued. 
	He is कृष्ण  as He has a body composed of the Suddha saththva which 
has a fascinating complexion dark like that of a blue cloud.
	"The affix 'nak' comes after the verb ' कृष् ' (to plough) when 
it means one of the colours." (कृष् +णक् =कृष्ण ).
	It has been declared by the ancients that the body of भगवान्  
in His incarnations as वराह  and the like is composed of the same 
material (Suddha-Saththva).
	"O Arjuna; the son of पार्थ! I become a big plough of black iron 
and plough this Earth. Since my colour is black I am known as 'कृष्ण'."
	All these as mentioned above are described clearly in श्री विष्णु तत्व :
	"There is one important Sakthi in the form of My body which is 
fivefold. Even  though भगवान्  is endowed with all kinds of शक्तीs 
(powers), He, because of His compassion, which is natural to Him, does 
not give them up at any time.
	परमेष्टी , पुमान् , विश्वः ,निवृत्तिः and Sarvah-- these are the  
five शक्तीस्  of the परमात्मा."
	Their real nature is described as being twofold and then it is 
continued :
	"O Best of Brahmins; The Incarnations of the Supreme Being as 
Mathsya, कूर्म ,वराह  and so on are only made with these शक्तीs, but 
not in any other way which will be contrary to them."
*555
 दृढः he who is in a gross form.
	From out of this eternal form of His, भगवान्  assumes by means 
of this Sakthi the व्यूह  (Emanation) for blessing His devotees.
	"Drudha' is derived from the roots 'drh' and 'drhi' (to grow).
	'Drudha' in the sense of 'firm' and 'strong' has been irregularly 
formed as the past passive participle."
*556
 संकर्षणः He Who draws others near Him.
	Who (assumes this gross form)? संकर्षण.
	The मूलाs say about Him thus : "In this world, He draws within 
Himself both the Chith and the Achith in the same way; He is संकर्षण . 
His power of attraction is uniform."
*557
 अच्युतः He who does not slip down.
	"When Brahma, वरुण  and others are subject to birth and death, and 
fall down from their position, Thou dost not fall down like that. So Thou 
art called Achyutha."
*558
 वरुणः He who envelops.
	"By Whom are covered the Ether, the Svarga and the Earth."
	"By Him all this is enveloped."
	So He is called वरुण  (Who covers everything).
	The word 'वरुण  ' is derived from the root 'vrjn' (to envelop). 
"The affix 'unan' comes after the roots 'kr', 'vr' and 'dr." 
(वृ +उण =वरुण ).
*559
 वारुणः He who is with His seekers
	वारुणः  is one who seeks Him as his master. भगवान् n is called वारुणः  
since, He is always with him.
	"I also am within them (even as they are within Me.)"
*560
 वृक्षः He who is the Resort.
	Like a shady tree, He is possessed of all things that are required 
by those who resort to Him and He also puts up with hundreds of injuries 
done by them. So He is वृक्ष  (their Resort).
	वृक्ष  is derived from 'vrj' (to seek or resort to).
	"He is the one Resort for the good and the supreme refuge in distress".
	"Like an unmoving and firm tree He stands in the Heavens."
	"There is no doubt that the ripe fruits of all desires will fall 
from that tree of Brahman Who is eternal and Who is the resort of all." 
And so on.
*561
 पुष्कराक्षः He who has nourishing eyes. 
	भगवान्  has two eyes which nouriढ the devotees by showering favours 
on them, So He is पुष्कराक्षः a.	The word 'पुष्कर' is formed by adding the 
affix 'karan' to the root 'पुष् ' (to nourish). It gets the 'kith' affix here.
*562
 महामनाः The broad minded. 
	His mind is always deep, generous and broad towards them. T
herefore He is महामनाः .
*563
 भगवान् He who is worthy of worship.
	He is called भगवान् , because He is extremely worthy of worship 
by virtue of His essential nature which is antagonistic to all defects 
and which is endowed with all auspicious qualities.
*564
 भगहा He who is possessed of auspicious qualities.
	By virtue of His attributes also He is worthy of respect  भागहा .
	"Riches of all kinds, valour, reputation, prosperity, knowledge and 
non-attachmentthese six qualities go by the name of 'bhaga'.
	'Hanthi'He goes to them (i.e. has all of them). The verb 'hanthi' is 
derived from the root 'han' signifying movement.
	In this context all that has been said in the Sixth Amsa of विष्णु  
पुरुष  with reference to the derivation of the word ' भगवान् ' must 
be written here.
*565
 नन्दी He who has Nanada as His father.
	The भगवान्  Who was संकर्षण  in the Vyuha (Emanation) became in 
the Vibhava Incarnation बलराम  and has नन्दगोप  as His father.
	Or He has the joy (आनन्द) of being addicted to 'madhu' (sweet 
drink) and also of being the beloved of Vallavis (गोप  damsels). In this 
sense, the word is to be taken as 'ँnandं'.
*566
 वनमाली He who has the Vana-maalaa
	He is always adorned by the वैजयन्ते  Garland which is the 
presiding Deity over the पञ्च-भुताs and Pancha-तन्त्रा-s 
(the five elements in their gross and subtle form) all of which are 
His creations and also over the quality of fragrance. So He is वनमाली .
*567
 हलायुधः The plough-armed
	He is हलायुधः  since, He like an agriculturist has the plough as 
the instrument and works for the prosperous growth of the पञ्च-भुता s  
referred to.
	"One should recite the name of Balabhadra while engaged in 
cultivation for the sake of the fertile growth (of the plants)".
*568
 आदित्यः The son of Aditi, (Devaki) or He who has to be 
realised by  means of 'Aa'.
	The Son of Adithi, (देवकी ) or He Who has to be realised by means 
of 'आ'.भगवान्  has the name of  आदित्य , because He is to be realised by 
the mystic letter 'आ' which signifies Him. The letter 'आ' is said to be 
the 'Bंja-manthra' of God संकर्षण . The word 'आदित्य ' is split into 
two words 'अत् ' and 'ithyah', (From the letter 'अ' + to be attained.) 
"The affix 'Kyap' comes after the roots 'I' stu' etc."
	Or He is आदित्य , because He is the son of देवकी  who was Adithi 
in her previous birth. The Vaiढखava Dharma states that भगवान्  spoke 
to देवकी  as follows :
	"You are दाक्षायणी  (the daughter of दक्ष ) born as Adithi in this 
world. You are the mother eternal of the world. I confer favours on you."
*569
 ज्योतिरादित्यः The Resplendent Aditya (sun)
	दभगवान्  has an effulgence which is celestial, unique and wonderful. 
So He is ज्योतिर्-आदित्य. The luminary, popularly known as the Sun, will 
fade into darkness before His resplendence.
	नारायण  says :
	"When they both (नर  and नारायण ) began to fight with Bhava (i.e. rudra)" "All the 
luminaries became devoid of their luminosity and Brahma too slipped from his seat."
*570
 सहिष्णुः He who has patience.
	In that fight the Lord put up with the wrong committed by Siva and 
therefore He is सहिष्णु .
	In the same context it is stated :
	"rudra then apologised to नारायण  Who was His Lord to win His favour. 
He also performed Prapaththi to Hari, the Creator of the world, the 
foremost Deity and the Giver of boons. The Supreme ruler, the Giver 
of boons, became gracious controlled His anger, became pleased and 
associated there with rudra."
*571
 र्गतिसत्तमः  The best instructor in the path of dharma.
	He is the best guide in the path of supreme Dharma and therefore He 
is most trust-worthy. He is Gathi-saththamah.
	"It is very pleasing to see that the path of Dharma has been 
honoured by all these देवा-s  here."
*572
 सुधन्वा He who has a spendid bow.
	He has a bow that brought about the end of the fight between the gods 
and असुराs which began with the distribution of the Nectar.
	"Then भगवान्  saw the celestial bow that was in the hands of नर ."
	"Then  नर  (the companion of नारायण ) covered the entire region of 
the sky with his great arrows bejewelled with bands of gold."
	"The affix 'anan' is the  substitute of the final 'u' in the word 
'dhanu' in the बहुर्व्रीहि  compound."
*573
 खण्डपरशुः He with the broken axe. 
	भगवान्  got the name of  Khanda-Parasu since the fight with अdra 
came to an end with the discharge of the axe by भगवान् .
	"Then for the destruction of rudra, नर  took up a reed and by the 
recitation of मन्त्रा-s gave new power to it. At once it became an immense 
axe. It was thrown on rudra with great force. But then it got broken. 
Because of the breaking of the axe, from that time I came to be known 
as 'Khandaparasu'the Lord with the broken axe."
*574
 दारुणः The splitter.He splits into pieces all the enemies both
       internal and external.
	In this way भगवान्  splits into pieces all the enemies both internal 
and external (i.e. those that work against a person both within his body 
and outside). So He is called दारुण   Splitter.
	"The affix 'unan' comes after the roots 'kr', 'vr' and 'dr', 
(दृ+उणान् =दारुण ).
*575
 द्रविणप्रदः The wealth giver.
	Next the Incarnation of भगवान्  as व्यास  (is described). He bestows 
the entire wealth viz. the substance of all the शास्त्रा-s and their meaning.
The following श्लोक described the form in which He is meditated upon :
"व्यास  holds in his left hand the collection of all the शास्त्रा-s  
and their purport, and propounds by his right hand the true import of 
all the शास्त्रा-s ."
*576
 दिविस्पृक् He who touches the Lord in the Paramapada.
	By His Para-vidya (Brahmic or Supreme knowledge). He touches the 
mystic nature of His Reality as it is in the Paramapada (Transcendental 
World).
	"He Who knows the Supreme Reality" is the Manthra for His meditation.
	"The affix 'kvin' comes after the verb 'sprsa' (to touch) when it 
is in composition with a case-inflected word other than 'udaka' (water)."
Here the word is 'divi'.
	"The Locative ending is not elided after a stem ending in a consonant 
or a short 'a' when the compound is a name.' (The 'I' of 'vi' in the word 
'divi' is not dropped.)
*577
 सर्वदृक् The all seer. He is srva-drk since He sees the great 
glory of all others also.
	He is Sarva druk since, He sees the great glory of all others also.
	The Manthra about Him is "To the Omniscient".
	"The rule about the 'kvin' affix quoted in the previous name (576) 
ढould be applied here also."
	"A stem formed with the affix 'kvin' substitutes at the end of a 
word a guttural for the final consonant." The letter 's' in the root 
'drs' is substituted by 'k' and the form is 'drk'.
*578
 व्यासः  The arranger.
	"Knowing (as he does the nature of the knowledge of the people in 
all) the three divisions of Time (the past, present and the future). 
He arranges the Vऍda that is in a single form into four divisions 
(as ruk, Yajus, साम  and अथर्व ), so that there may not be any difficulty
in its study for the people whose knowledge diminishes in accordance 
with the changes of the Four युगा-s."
*579
 वाचस्पतिः The master of words. 
He is the Master of Words which are in the form of the fifth वेद  
(i.e. महाभारत ).
*580
 अयोनिजः He who was not born out of the womb of a woman.
	He Who was not born out of the womb (of a woman).
	In His incarnation as सारस्वत  (the Lord of Speech), He was born 
out of the word (भगवान्  and not from the womb of a woman). So He is 
called अयोनिजः.
	"Then the Supreme भगवान्   the Lord created the world once again 
and pronounced the letter 'Bho' aloud which sent an echo everywhere. 
Then the Lord spoke सरस्वती  (the words). And there was born सारस्वत ."
*581
 त्रिसामा He who is propounded by the three fold Saama Veda.
	He is  त्रिसामा  since He has the 'Bruhath', 'रथन्तर ' and 
'वाम देव्य' the three important kinds of सामवेद  which sing His praise.
*582
 सामगः The saama singer. 
	He Himself sings such valuable साम  Hymns with great joy resulting 
from the full enjoyment of Himself. In fact the delight which is 
produced by enjoying the परमात्म  and His qualities makes others 
also sing abut it. It is said :
	"(The Muktha) remains there singing this साम ."
	The affix 'thak' comes after the verbs 'ga' (to sing) and 'पा' 
(to drink) when used without preposition and when the object is in 
composition with it."
*583
 साम The Displler.
	He is साम  since He dispels the sins of those who sing about Him.
	The word 'साम ' is derived from the root 'षो' ('so') (to put an end 
to). "The affixes 'मणिन् ' and 'manin come after the roots 'so' (to put 
an end to) and 'at' (to go).
*584
 निर्वाणं The Blise. 
	Being the cause for the attainment of the Supreme Goal (Bliss) 
by those whose sins have been annihilated. He is निर्वाणम् .
	"The word 'निर्वाणम् ' is irregularly formed by changing the past 
passive participle 'tha' to 'na' when the wind is not the agent of 
the verb." (The word is derived thus : 'nir+वा+ण=nir+वा+ण=निर्वाण ).
*585
 भेषजं The Remedy. 
	Therefore He is the effective remedy (भेषजम् ) for the incurable 
disease of संसार .
	In (भीष्म ) स्तव-राज  it is said :
	"The groups of ऋषी-s, सिद्धास् , महोरग-s (the Serpents) gods, and 
godly seers came to know of this medicine for the disease of संसार  
(from नारायण .)"
*586
 भिषक् The Physician. 
	He is भिषक्  since, He is an expert in the diagnosis of the disease 
as well as its treatment.
*587
 संन्यासकृत् He who cuts asunder the bonds when desires are 
renounced
	He Who cuts asunder (the bonds) when desires are renounced.
	How does He give the treatment? He cuts asunder the bonds in the 
form of रजोगुण  and तमोगुण  when acts are performed in a disinterested 
manner with a spirit of renunciation of desire for the fruit. Here the 
word 'सन्यास ' signifies the surrender of the burden to the Master. 
That surrender alone is the remedy for the संसार . This is in accordance 
with the Sruthi alao :
	"Those who have acquired the true knowledge (of Thatthva, Hitha and 
पुरुषार्थ ) by the study of the उपनिषदs, do योग  by doing acts renouncing 
the desire for fruits and giving up the idea that they are the chief agent 
of the acts. By this process their minds become pure and they practise 
Bhakthi योग . At the end of their last body they attain the Brahman and 
become free from all Karma."
*588
सामः He who instructs.
	For that purpose He gives instruction about the means for the control 
of desire, fear and ager as stated in the गीता  :
	"Having learnt that I am the enjoyer of the fruits of all sacrifices 
and austerities."
	The affix 'nich' is added to the root 'Sam' of the tenth Conjugation 
in the sense of 'he teaches'. The form 'साम ' is got by adding the affix 
'ach' to the roots grouped under 'pach'.
*589
 शान्तः He whose mind is always tranquil. 
	Even though there is every reason for the rise of the ocean of 
abundant greatness, He is tranquil like a calm and waveless ocean. 
Pathanjali sings about the greatness of those who have a sight of Him 
thus :
	"There is the abandonment of enmity in his presence."
	A poet of later times (भारवि ) also says the same with reference 
to व्यास  :
	"व्यास  had a charming resplendence which was spreading in all 
directions and which could be seen with the eye and which burnt all 
sins and by His sweet looks he made even the wild animals tranquil."
*590
 निष्ठा The object of concentration. 
	The object of concentration have Him and His body as the object 
of their meditationbody, which is pure and fascinating.
	"The affix 'ajn' comes after those verbs which end in long 
'aa' when an upasarga (preposition) is in composition and when then 
word to be formed is feminine."
*591
 शान्तिः Peace. 
	In the final stage of perfect meditation they forget all other 
activites and are tranquil.
*592
 परायणम्  The Ultimate Means.
	From Him is acquired the highest Bhakthi (the supreme means, for 
attaining Him. Which leads those directly who meditate on Him Vide :
	Beginning with the श्लोक , "Giving up egosim etc., he who is free 
from the sense of possessiveness and is tranquil is fit for the state of 
Brahman." And ending with. "(He who has realised the state of 
Brahman and who is tranquil, in spirit, neither grieves nor desires. 
He is the same to all beings and attains eminent devotion for Me."
	"But through the exclusive devotion, O Arjuna, it is possible 
really (to know, to see and to enter into Me. I am like this. "Harasser 
of foes!")
*593
 शुभाङ्गः He who os with the eight accessories of yoga.
	The eight अन्गाs (accessories) of योग  beginning with 'Yama' and 
ending with 'Concentration' which are auspicious on account of the 
devotion to Him are obtained by His favour. It is He that helps people 
to begin and complete the meditation on Him.
	(The eight angas of योग  are ; Yama, Niyama, आसन, प्राणयाम , 
प्रत्याहार ,धारण ", ध्यान  and संधी.)
*594
 शान्तिदः The bestowerof eternal peace. 
	He confers Peace which is in the form of His own Realisation on 
those who have obtained perfect devotion, and for them there is no 
longer any fear from rebirth in this world. Vide :
	"If a person realises the auspicious God Who pervades the 
Universe, He attains perfect peace."
	"When a person realises that God Who is the ruler, Who is the 
grantor of boons, Who is worthy of praise and the Inner Soul, he 
obtains the highest peace."
*595
 स्रष्टा The creator.
	Thus He brings about the release of those who long for release 
(from संसार ) grants the desires of those who wish to continue in 
संसार  and possess the various things of the world quite in accordance 
with the Karma that they have accumulated from time immemorial. 
He is स्रष्टा (the Creator) in this way.
	"The augment 'am' (a' comes after the 'r' of 'srj' (to create) 
and 'drs' (to see) when the affix beginning with a 'jhal' (i.e. a mute 
and the sibilant) follows provided it has no indicatory 'k' 
(Srj+Trn=sr+a+ja+trn=स्रष्ट्र ).
*596
 कुमुदः He who is happy.
	'Ku' is the world which consists of objects, high and low-like 
sound touch, etc. which are a source of pleasure for all created beings 
from Brahma to a tiny blade of grass, In this material world He makes 
all those beings enjoy those things and Himself feels delighted by that. 
So He is Kumuda.
	"The Individual soul which is powerless is kept bound to this world 
as an enjoyer."
	"परमात्मा and जीवात्म are both of them birthless; One is the ruler 
and the other ruled; one is omniscient and the other of little knowledge."
	"The words 'मूल-विभूज ' (a chariot), 'Kumuda' (lotus) and the 
rest should be included in the subdivision of words formed by the affix 'ka'. (This 
is the वार्तिक  under the सूत्र  "तुण्डा-शोकयोः " etc. (अष्टाद्यायी  3-2-5).
*597
 कुवलेशयः The Controller of the Jivas who wander in this world as
	masters of their bodies.
	The Controller of the जीवा-s who wander in this world as masters of their bodies.
	(This name is interpreted by dividing it into several parts as : Ku+vala+ंsa+yँ. 
'Ku' means the world or in an evil way; 'vala' is derived from the verb 'valanthi' 
which means wander. The word 'कुवलाs' signifies the जीवा-s  who are wandering in 
this world or who are going about in an evil way. 'ईश ' means ruler. This refers 
to the जीवा-s who think they are the masters of their bodies and Indriyas. 'या' comes 
from the verb यति ' (goes). This refers to 
परमात्म . Thus the word कुवलेशय  is the name of परमात्मा  who goes about controlling 
the जीवा-s who are wandering in this world in an evil way till the end of their worldly 
existence thinking that they are the masters of their own bodies and sense-organs.
*598
 गोहितः He Who manipulates the world.
	'Go' means Prakruthi (the Primordial Matter) which is like the 
field where the seeds for the growth of  संसार  (for the जीवा (are sown). 
'Hitha' means the manipulator or controller परमात्म , as the 
Supreme ruler, controls the Prakruthi, the field in which the seeds for 
the growth of the worldly existence for the Jivas are sown.
	"(One should meditate) on that Lord Who presides over every thing 
that is the cause of the world like Prakruthi etc., in whom all things 
merge at the time of dissolution, and from Whom they emerge and disperse 
(at the time of creation)."
	"This Prakruthi, which has neither beginning nor end produces things 
like a mother and nourishes them."
	"This Universe is controlled by Him and all objects of enjoyment 
are produced by Him."
*599
 गोपतिः The lord of the Celestial world.
	भगवान्  is the Lord of the Svarga also which is the place of 
enjoyment (for the जीवा-s).
*600
 गोप्ता The Protector.
	भगवान्  is the गोप्ता  (Protector) since, He is the protector of
 the world and dispenser of the fruits of Karma (good or bad) which are 
going on revolving like a wheel.
