*1
विश्वं Full in all respects 
Here at the outset, the all-round  fullness and perfection of भगवान्  
is delineated by the word 'Visvam'. This word is derived from the
root 'vis' to enter, with the  addition of the 'kvan' suffix according
to a grammatical rule, in the sense of  'He  enters'  (all  the  parts). 
In  the  मोक्ष-धर्म of  महाभारतः , पञ्चशिक्ष  explains this word 'विश्वं' to
संयम as follows:-
""" O the king of काशि They say भगवान् is 'विश्वं' because He enters all"
the words. O King!   They  also say  that the worlds themselves are
"called "" विश्वं""."
It is  propounded  that  भगवान्  is perfect and full to the brim with
reference to His essential nature, form,  qualities and glory, all of
which are natural, Unexcelled,  superior  and auspicious. The word
विश्वं denotes entirety and  it  is  quite fitting that the fact of Bhagavँn
being the possessor of unlimited and immense glory is declared
even in the beginning. ' विश्वं' is in the neuter gender. As it is the
name of विष्णु one may expect it to be in masculine gender. But the
gender of a word  is determined by usage and not by grammar
alone. Some opine that the word ' विश्वं' which  generally  connotes
'effect' is here used to denote the cause. This view cannot stand;
because भगवान् alone is the primary and direct import of all the
namesb here, both by etymological derivation and conventional
usage. It is incorrect to adopt the view that  भगवान् is only the
secondary import of the names. There are others who  explain
that the word ' विश्वं' connotes the identity of ब्रह्मन् and the Universe.
This theory does  not take  us  in the right path. To explain - the  word  ' विश्वं'
does not signify identity. It  may be  argued that identity  can be arrived
"at as in the case of the उपनिषद Manthra ""तत् त्वं असि "" and the identity of"
the two is postulated. Our reply is that, that argument cannot be applied
here.  Firstly, there is  no  co-ordination  of two words. Secondly, all are
proper names each of which is an independent unit and  they are not co-
nducive to the idea of identity. Again there is a difference in the genders
of  names  as  for example  'विश्वं' which is in the Neuter gender and 'विष्णु'
in the Masculine gender.  We  can  see that the entirety or fullness that is
depicted here is elaborated by all the names beginning with 'विष्णु'. 
*2
विष्णु One who pervades 
This name connotes that भगवान् pervades all that He possesses. He enters
into all  the sentient and non-sentient things that are His wealth. The Sruthi
declares.
"He entered all the beings, movable and immovable",
"He entered into the same."
"Kऍsava   exists   everywhere,  having  pervaded  all these  worlds.
Therefore Thy name is विष्णु  since  the  root  vis  denotes entry i.e.
"pervasion".
The word विष्णुis formed by  the  addition of  the suffix  'knu'  to  the 
root 'vis'  which  means  'to enter'. The  suffix 'knu' is added to show 
that the quality is  ever  innate in Him. By this,  it is  taught that this 
greatness of विष्णु is quite natural to Him. The first name विश्वम् refers
to the   fullness, and the second name (विष्णु) to  pervasion. Therefore
there is no redundance.
*3
वषट्कारः - One who controls and directs (not merely pervades).
The object of the pervasion of the Universe by भगवान as distinguished
from that byआकाश (ether) is stated here by  this name. He  makes  all
act according to His will - hence the name 'वषट्कार'. The root  is  'vas'
meaning कान्ति (lustre) and the suffix 'at'  is added. The substitute 'sha'
takes the place of 'sa' in the root 'vas'. The upanishad declares.
" He is the controller of all and the Ruler of all".
"This Universe is under His  Control."
*4
भूतभव्यभवत्प्रभुः The master of all things in the past, future and present.
He is  therefore that  Master of all things t hat exist in  all the three
periods of time. Prabhu-स्वामी and शेषी-Lord and Master. The suffix
'du' is added to roots (like भू ) when the prepositions  like  'vi'  and
'pra' are prefixed. The grammatical rule lays down that if the result-
ing word is  a  name, the 'du' suffix should  not  be  added. Here the
word 'Prabhu' is only part of a word which is a name and so 'du' has
been affixed.
Thus do the शास्त्रा proclaim:-
"(He who is) the Lord of the Universe"
"The Lord of Lords".
"He is the one Lord of all beings" 
"This Universe belongs to that पुरुष."
"All these directions and quarters are His"
"This universe of moving and non-moving things exists indeed for
the sake of  श्रीकृष्ण ." 
"केशवा, the slayer of  केशी (the Asura) is the Lord of the past, present
and future"
"He is the Lord of the world, O' King"
And other such texts.
*5
भूतकृत्- The creator of all beings. He creates all things without 
depending on anything else . 
The Sruthis declare:
"All these have been verily created by Brahman ( भगवान् )".
"From Him all beings are born".
*6
भूतभृत्- The supporter of all things. He bears all things.
"He supports the universe and He is the navel of the Earth."
" As in  a  car, the  circumference of the wheel is placed on the spokes,
and the spokes on the navel, even so the subtle elements  (i.e. the body)
rest on the subtle intelligence (i.e. the जीव ); and the subtle intelligence
rests on the प्राण ( the vital airs i.e. परमात्मा )."
"He bore the Earth".
" The indestructible Lord bears" - Gंtha.
*7
भावः He who exists 
Like a peacock with its expanded feathers, He exists possessed of all 
the riches mentioned already and to be mentioned hereafter. 
"This word has been derived from the root 'bhu' (bhavathi)by the addition 
of the suffix 'na'. Since all things are his attributes (प्रकरण ), and 
He as the substratum has them all in Him, they are delineated as His 
riches or glories ( विभूति ).
*8
भूतात्मा The soul of all beings.
This state of all things being the possessions of Bhagavan and  His  being 
the possessor  is  particularised by  saying that they are His body and  He 
their soul (i.e.the individual soul)  is  described  as  the  soul  of the  body 
that belongs to it. That  is because the soul  enters  into the body,  directly
 controls and directs all its activities. परमात्मा does the same with reference
to all beings. The nature of the relationship between the soul and the body
is distinct from and more intimate than the relationship between the indiv-
idual soul on the one hand and the wife, house, field etc. on the other hand.
Numerous passages from the वेदा and पुराण-s can be cited in support of this
view. Here are a few of them:
"He who is in the Earth"
"He who is in the आthma"
"He Whose body the Earth is"
"This (भगवान् ) is the Inner soul of all beings" 
"The entire Universe is Thy body" 
"All of them are His body"
"All that is indeed the body of Hari."
*9
भूतभावनः He who nourishes all beings
He is Bhu:tha-भाvanah because He makes all beings grow by bestowing
on them things that sustain  them, nouriSH them and contribute to their
enjoyment. It may be taken that the affix 'lyu' is added here according to
the rule that 'lyu' may be added after 'nandi' and other  words. Or it may
be taken that the affix 'lyut' is  added  here  to denote the agent of an act.
The names "भाvanah" (32) and "Prathardana(60) are also to be taken as
words ending with the 'lyut' suffix.
"He is the Sustainer of the Universe and also the Lord of the Universe"
"He is the Protector of beings"
Thus His mastery (शेषित्व) has been  established  by virtue of His being the
Creater, Sustainer, Director and Protector.  The term '' (Master)  signifies
one for whose purpose or benefit an object is  created and  nourished. The
पूर्व मीमांसा  सूत्र  says:  "That  object  is  called 'शेष' (or Subordinate) which
exists for the benefit  of another."
*10
पूतात्मा The pure self .
Though भगवान is the Soul of all objects, unlike the individual souls He 
is not affected by the defects of the Sentient and non-sentient  objects 
which are His body. That is, He is pure by  nature. Though the contact
with the body is similar to both परमात्मा  and  जीवात्मा, the lower soul (i.e.
the individual soul) alone  reaps the fruits of his actions and is subject
to  suffering.  The Sruthi declares - "The other Aja (unborn, i.e. जीवात्मा 
eaves it after it has been enjoyed. But the Supreme Soul ( परमात्मा ) who
makes the other experience joy or sorrow because of  His free will and
independence, not only does not enjoy it, but also shines brilliantly. This
can  be  explained by an analogy: when a teacher beats a student with a
cane the contact with  the cane  is  the same both for the teacher and the
student. It is only the student who is beaten that experiences the pain of 
the beating but not the teacher who beats.
This is taught to us by various texts :-
"The other ( परमात्मा ) Who does not eat, shines with all brilliance."
"He is the inner soul of all beings and is devoid of all sins".
"Actions do not taint Me" - (गीत ).
"Narada! Look at the superiority and greatness of the Lord ( परमात्मा),
who is never tainted by actions, good or bad."
The Brahma सूत्र  says : "If you, who hold the prima facie view say
that  परमात्मा too (owing to His association with the body) will exp-
erience the fruit of an act, we say, no. For by nature He is superior
to all."
*11
परमात्मा The supreme Soul 
Unlike  all  beings which have  Him as their  Inner Soul, परमात्मा  does
not have any one as His Inner Soul (आत्म ). Therefore भगवान्  is called 
परमात्मा. The word 'Parama' is  derived  thus:  'parah मा   asya' meaning 
' He who has no one superior to Him;  The  form  'parama'  is  gramm-
atically correct on the analogy of the  word  'paramah'  (Supreme)  and
'आthma' (Inner soul).  That  is  to say there  is no ruler above Him who
controls Him.
The following passages establish this fact:
"He who is the ruler of His own आthma."
"There is no one who is superior to Him."
"Nothing is seen which equal or superior to Him."
"Superior to Him there is no one whatsoever."
"The best of भारता-s! Nothing is seen which superior to the Lotus-
eyed (Lord)."
"Greater than the Lotus-eyed (Lord) there was nothing (in the past) 
not will there be (in the future)."
"There is no God greater than केशव ."
"Nothing is higher than the Parama-पुरुष , who is without end, 
beginning or middle."
"Greater than Myself  there is nothing  else."
"There is no greater nectar than भगवान् of  Universal form."
"He is greater than the great. He is superior and He is the Supreme 
Soul."
*12
मुक्तानां परमा गतिः- He, who is thus the Supreme goal for all the
Released Souls ( मुक्ता-s).
They are called the Released Souls who once for all and completely
are free from the enshrouding coverings which are the results of the
bondage of the Primordial Matter, nescience latent impressions  of
actions and their fruitions.
Here are some passages from the scriptures:- 
"(The उपासक ) casts off his merits and sins (पुण्यः and पापः ).
"Ever as a horse shakes its hair (to get rid of the dust), he casts off his
sins."
"shaking off the merits and sins".
"Then the learned उपासक becomes freed from name and form."
"When he realises God, he is released from all bonds."
"The knot binding the heart is cut."
"They cross this माय  (i.e. संसार )". (गीत ).
श्री नारायणीय  (महाभारत ) teaches: -- "Those, who are bereft of 	the
seventeen qualities and actions, give up the fifteen 'Kalas' (or lores)
and become Released Souls. This is certain."
Note-  Seventeen qualities  Five Elements, fiveज्ञानेन्द्रियs, five कर्मेन्द्रियs, mind
and time. The sixteens parts (Kalas)  are mentioned in the प्रस्नोपनिषद्. It has
been established in the Scriptures that those, who have been freed from all
the shackles of संसार attain equality with परमात्म, the Supreme Soul, in regard
to the essential nature which is full of unlimited knowledge and Bliss, in re-
gard to the eight qualities beginning with "being devoid of all sins" and end-
ing  with "unfailing will"  and also in regard to the enjoyment  of  Beatitude.
"Witnessing the desired objects through his celestial eye and mind, 	he is
happy."
"Becoming devoid of all sins, he attains utmost equality with the Lord."
"They attain a state of equality with me (like Myself in regard to the poss-
ession of auspicious qualities)."
"बद्रायण affirms that there is no contradiction between the two 	statements
that the Muktha's essential nature is knowledge only and that they are end-
owed with many qualities. This is because of earlier statements according
to which the pure soul is bereft of all blemiढes, and full of auspicious
qualities."
It is further established that the Released Souls attain a similarity with परमात्म
even in regard to their bodies which are composed of 	unmixed and supreme
सत्वगुण  (Suddha-Saththva).
"He becomes one, he becomes one  (he becomes two fold)."
"He eats, plays and enjoys."
"He enjoys whatever he desires, assumes whatever form he wants and 
follows (The Lord)."
"The fragrance of Brahman enters into him."
"The taste of Brahman enters into him."
"The celestial damsels adorn him with the decorations of the Brahman Itself.
"बद्रायण  holds the view that the Released Souls are in two forms (i.e. with a
body or without a body as they like). It is like the सोम  Sacrifice,' द्वादशाः ' by
name, which is to be done for twelve 	days and which is of two kinds 
(either with one master or many masters) or (either for prosperity or for
progeny.) Here the word 'मुक्तानां' used in the plural number shows clearly
that the Released souls are many and are different from one another. So
do the Scriptures declare.
"All become free by the grace of theपरमपुरुष."
"The worshippers of परमपुरुष  become great and attain the Transcendent
world of Bliss (परमपद )."
"They  attain a state of equality with me in regard to the possession of
auspicious qualities like Myself."
"They attain Me."
As it is stated here itself that 'He is a witness." (साक्षी -names 	15 and 517)
and that He is the object of attainment by the मुक्ताs ( Released Souls), it is
clear that there is difference between गवान्  and Released Souls. So do the
Scriptures declare. 
"When the उपासक  sees the Lord as being pleased with him and also realises
His Greatness, he becomes bereft of all sorrow."
"When he understands that the आत्मा  (individual Soul) (which is driven about)
and He परमात्म, (who drives him) are different."
"The Released Soul attains the परमपुरुष."
"The Released Soul enjoys all bliss along with the omniscient Brahman."
"He attains the Lord of Supreme Effulgence."
"It is stated that परमात्म is attained by the Released Soul."
It is also clearly stated in मोक्षधर्म (महाभरत):
"He is Lord नारायण  and He must be known as the Supremeपुरुष  and 	the
Inner Soul of all beings. Just as the lotus leaf is not tainted 	by water.
He is not tainted by any dirt (i.e.blemish). He who is the other, is known
as कर्मात्म and is the victim of bondage and release. He becomes associated
with all the seventeen (qualities).
Note The seventeen qualities are : Fiveकर्मयोगs five ज्ञानयोगs, five भूतs, mind
and time.
From all these, this  theory is dispelled  by  theशास्त्र themselves,  theory  viz,
that Brahman itself, circumscribed by a real or unreal  उपाधी (i.e. a  limiting
adjunct) becomes a pray to the worldly miseries like the other circumscribed
in a vessel, and that there is absolutely no difference in the state of  Release
between the Supreme Brahman itself", which speak of non-difference betw-
een the two are reconciled with the other view that  those  two  are  different.
This is in analogy with the statement. "This is a cow" in regard to those which
have broken horns or without horns. All the cows under the genus of cows are
called as such, though there is an external difference - some having broken
horns and some not so. In the case of those who say that there is non-
difference,  statements  which  affirm  non-difference and which affirm
similarity  between  Brahman and Jंvas in the state of Release will co-
ntradict each other. अनुपाधिक-भेद-वादिनs (i.e. those who hold the view that 
non-difference is the truth and difference is caused by limiting adjuncts) 
accept that there is an bond to the entity of the Muktha or Released Souls. 
In that case the state of Release will cease to be an object to be desired or
longed for; again it will be against the statements that declare that existe-
nce of difference in the state of  Release. The supreme similarity (betwe-
en the परमात्म, the Muktha) which we have delineated has been described
as non-difference. So (अभेद्य ) the non-difference delineated in the Upani-
shads refers only to the similarity of the qualities and not to the non-exis-
tence of the entity of Muktha as such.)
The विष्णपुराण  explains this as follows: 
"तद भावा-भावं आपन्नाः तदा असु परमात्मना भवति अभेदे"
thasya-pertaining to परमात्म ;भावनः-qualities like knowledge, strength etc.
 तेषां भावः - their manifestation i.e., similarity of qualities. In the interpre-
tation given by others, the second word 'भाव' would be purposeless. "This
 Muktha (Released soul) attains a nature which is similar to that of परमात्म.
Then he becomes non-different from परमात्म"
The Prohibition of difference in the state of Release has been indicated to
be with reference  to the adventitious conditions as good and the like (by
the sameविष्णु पुराण) as follows. 
"There is no longer the difference  in  the form of gods and the like; that
shroud (i.e. Karma, which has been concealing the similarity between the
 जीव  and  theपरमात्म) has  been  dispelled. This word 'gathi' (in the name
 "मुक्तानाम परमाँ गतिः") has at 	its  end  the suffix  'kthin' in the sense of the
passive. 'Gathih' means attainment. A word  in  the  Accusative case (i.e.
objective case) refers to an object which  is  most desired; and that is the
goal of attainment. By this it is shown that the relationship between the 
Released Soul and परमात्म, the object of attainment, is that of servant and
master. 
The Vedic  मन्त्राs say:
"Having attained the Supreme Soul (परमात्म) full of bliss." 
"(The Muktha) follows Him"
"By that path by which परमात्म  moves, by the same path the Muktha goes
with Him. This is similar to a young cow going after its calf or a calf foll-
owing its mother-cow."
"Like the shadow of an object that goes with the object wherever it goes."
In the same manner (does the Muktha follow theपरमात्म). It is from the Sc-
riptures that we know about the existence of 	जीवात्म and परमात्म. The
same scriptures reveal that the जीवात्म  is 'Sesha' or subordinate toपरमात्म
and that this subjection is natural to him like knowledge and other qual-
ities of his and in the state of Release this attribute of subjection is not
negatived. On the other hand, because of the removal of obstruction, it
becomes manifest.
"He becomes endowed with the form natural to him (which was conce-
aled  till now)" says (the chandogya Upanishad). विष्णु dharma also states:
"Just as the radiance of a gem is not newly created, (but only made mani-
fest) when the dirt on the gem is removed by polishing, so too knowledge
and other such qualities are indeed quite natural to him (and are always
there though latent at some times (i.e. in संसार).
"Oh! The ruler of  Men!  Knowledge and non-attachment riches and virtue
- all these four qualities are eternally present in the जीवात्म who is like Brah-
man Itself because of his similarity." The Brahma सूत्र  also confirms this; "
When the Muktha attains the Brahman, there is the manifestation of his
essential nature which is his own. This is revealed by the use of the word
'svena' (his own) as an adjective 	qualifying the noun रूपेन' (his essential
nature or form)". Here an objection is raised: "He attains independence".
"He becomes a sovereign". After quoting these texts, the independent sta-
tus of  a Muktha is establisheed by the following Brahma सूत्र; "For that very
reason he has none as (his) lord." Against all this, how 	can it be said that he
exists for the benefit of another and how can the undesirable state of a depe-
ndent be predicated 	about him?
Dunce! Don't  become  an object  of  ridicule. Here the import of the word 
'Ananya-adhipathithvam' (i.e.being  without  another master ) is that He is
under the control of भगवान्  only, who is His own Master. The domination
of  other things like distress and karma over the Muktha has been removed.
This does not mean that he is an 'अनाथ ' (i.e. one without a master to save
him). If that were the case, the word 'अनाधइ पति ' (which means without a
master ) would have been used, and not 'ananya-adhipathih' (which means 
'without another master').  In the case of a wife, being subject to a greatly
loving husband is not loathsome to her for we see that even kings and others
are eagerly served and subserved by their sweet hearts and others when they
do what is most pleasing to them. Again and again it has been indicated that
it is the qualities that occupy a place of importance (and not any thing else).
It has been establiढed in the Brahma सूत्रs that the equality between the परमात्म
and the जीवात्म  is only with reference to the enjoyment of Bliss and excludes
the state of being the ruler on the one hand and the ruled on the other. 
"The जीवीत्म is like theपरमात्मa Himself except with reference to the activities
regarding the Universe, Viz. Its creation, 	destruction etc."
"There are clear indicatons to ढow that the equality of the जीवीत्म and
परमात्म  is only in the enjoyment of Supreme Bliss."
Here are other texts in support  of this view:-
श्री विष्णु तत्वा- 1. "The Muktha attains complete subjection to  परमपुरुष.
He gets rid of all bondage and attains unparalleled freedom. He enjoys
all Bliss along with the परमपुरुष." 
"With the जीवीत्म  the state of being a property (that is possessed) rests
and the state of being the owner or possessor rests with परमात्म. This is
the relationढip between the two. Nothing else appeals to me." 
श्री नारायणीय  (महाभारत)-
"At the end of the observance of our vow, we saw men with highly 
auspicious qualities, white, bright like the moon and endowed with
all lovely features. Their hands were joined in prayer at all times, and
they were meditating upon the Brahman with their faces turned towa-
rds north east."
"With their hands joined in prayer they are always happy and are always
repeating the word 'namah' (which means salutations unto Thee)". 
"They have controlled the sense-organs, and remain without food. They
do not perpire and are always sweetsmelling."
These and other such texts describe the residents of  स्वेत-द्वीप (the Holy
White Island ) and say that they are endowed with divine features and the
like, and they derive great pleasure in being the 	servants of the Lord and
in doing unceasing service to Him. The same is said to be the state  and
occupation of the Mukthँs or Released Souls. 
This is reiterated by the following text: 
"The best among the भारताs! Those men who are released from here have
the same characteristics as those who are the residents of स्वेत-द्वीप (The Holy
White Island)." 
By the use of the word 'परमा' (highest) as an  adjective qualifying 'gathih'
(goal) (in the phrase 'परमा gathih) it should be understood that there are
some for whom the goal is of a lower order. Such a goal, which goes by
the name of Kaivalya, is resorted to by those souls who are free from old
age, death etc. (श्री कृष्ण says in the गीत ).
"They resort to me and make efforts to be devoid of old age and death."
It is stated that such a place (Kaivalya by name) is some where between
संसार  (material world) and Paramapada  (Transcendental word). "That
is the eternal world of those yogins who are satisfied with enjoyment of
the Bliss of their own individual soul." Such is the Supreme Goal of the
 मुक्ताs.
 "He is the Highest means; He is the Supreme Goal."
"He who is the inner Soul of the universe and the highest goal".
"(They attain) Me, the unsurpassed Goal." 
"He reaches the end of the road (i.e.परमात्मा)."
"There is nothing 	greater than the attainment of the (Supreme) आत्मन् ".
Texts like these can be easily got.
That भगवान्  is the Supreme Goal of attainment, for, the Mukthas is corro-
borated by the next five names (13 to 17).    
*13
अव्ययः  He by whom Mukta is not sent away. 
The word is derived from the verb 'na वीयते .' His name is Avyaya,
because no one is sent away by Him. The suffix added is 'erach'.
The names  प्रत्या' (94), 'विनयः' (510)'जयः' (511) and the like belong
to this group (which has this particular suffix). Is it not a well-known
fact that the भगवान् never sends back that आत्म  who has, by some
means and with great effort, crossed the vast ocean of  संसार  and
has reached His lotus-feet. 
That is why  the Vedas declare-
"They  who go by this path (i.e. अर्चिरादि-गतीi) attain  भगवान्  and) do
not come back to this mortal world."
"He does not return; he does not return"
"There is no return according to the scripture. There is no return
according to Scripture."
Yama स्मृति i Says: - 
"The Muktha bears a body  of  pure and subtle Saththva and attains the
Supreme Lord who is the परमात्मा  and नारायण as well as the glorious and
superior वैकुण्ठा . Then he becomes fit for immortality and does not come
back (to this world) any more." dealing with yathi-dharma (the code of
the सन्यासि ) says:- 
"One who has taken to the life of a yathi (Recluse) is calm equally disp-
osed  towards all beings and self-controlled. He attains the highest place
(i.e.वैकुण्ठा ) and after reaching  it, never comes back".
*14
पुरुषः The generous Giver
He bestows gifts in plenty. 'Puru' means plenty, and 'sanothi' the verb 
signifies the act of giving. The suffix 'da' is added when the root 'san' 
is preceded by the particle 'puru'. The rule says that it is added even in 
the case of other particles. भगवान्  indeed bestows even on the Mukthas
the enjoyment of the Bliss of  Himself, His qualities and  His glory  all 
of which are beyond the range of words and mind. 
Here are the Vedic मन्त्राs that reveal this:- 
"He (भगवान् ) alone confers Bliss"
"He (The Muktha) enjoys all desirable things along with the omniscient
Brahman."
"By his celestial eye and mind he (the Muktha) sees all desirable things
and enjoys."
"There the Muktha enjoys all kinds of  bliss. He eats, plays and experie-
nces joy."
"He enjoys all that he desires and assumes whatever form he  likes." 
"He  (The Para Brahman) is itself  Bliss. Having attained that Para
Brahman  this Muktha becomes endowed with joy, when he attains the
Brahman." 
"भगवान्  (who is आनन्दमय  is said to be the source of Bliss for others.
(i.e. the individual souls)."
*15
साक्षी He who sees them all directly.
Bhagaवाn is known as "साक्षी" (witness) because He directly sees the मुक्ताs
enjoy the Bliss  He has bestowed and he is also happy seeing them full of
joy. The suffix 'in' is added to the root according to a grammatical rule to
form a noun to show that the person is direct eye-witness to a particular act.
The object of attainment  by  the Muktha, viz,. "Brahman, the Omniscient".
Omniscience is explained as knowledge capable of cognising all things of
varied nature. 
*16
क्षेत्रज्ञः The knower of the field for action.
Bhagavan is called क्षेत्रज्ञः because  he  knows the extreamely suitable place
for conferring on the Released Souls  in  this way the joy of enjoying Him. 
The  suffix  'ka'  is  added  to  the  root 'ज्ञ' (to know) in the word क्षेthrajnah
according to the grammatical rule which says. "The suffix  'ka' is added to
a root which ends in 'आ' (likeज्ञ), when it is not preceded by a preposition
and the final 'आ' of the root is dropped." The parama-vyओma, i.e. vaikuntta
is referred to here as क्षेत्र (field) because it is the place which yields the crop
 of Bliss in plenty. or 'क्षेत्र' may mean the body of bhagaवाn itself possessed
of a similar quality. The Vedic Manthra proclaims "Brahman has आकाश (i.e.
 vaikuntta) as its body.
" In Narayaण्य (महाभारत) the goal of attainment by the muktha, i.e. परमात्म, is
specified as the क्षेत्रज्ञ in the following Slओka."
"Oh Brahma! The goal of attainment for the mukthas is specified as 	the क्षेत्रज्ञ ."
That again is the place where the मुक्ताs enjoy भगवान् . 
"He (the muktha) enjoys (भगवान् ) in Parama-व्योम , i.e., vaikuntta."
"The greatness (in the form of enjoying भगवान् ) is obtained by the muktha in
 श्री vaikuntta."
"He (the muktha) shines in श्री Vaikuntta"
"He (the muktha) enjoys Bliss in Vaikuntta"  
Here is a Manthra which expresses the wish of a muktha who does not
want rebirth in this world. 
"When compared with the eternal Viakuntta (Parama-आकाश ) this आकाश  
(Ether) adorned with flower - like stars is without lustre like night. I go to
vaikuntta and begin to live there. May I not have rebirth."
"That is the supreme Abode of Mine, after reaching which they (the Rel-
eased Souls) do not come back."
In the मोक्षधर्म , it is said:- when the soul gets rid of the fear of  old age and
death, he becomes endowed with the auspicious qualities mentioned in the
authoritative texts viz. Vedas and आगमा, and he becomes freed from the
cause (i.e.Karma) and its fruit (i.e. the body). The आकाश he reaches (i.e.
vaikuntta is without the name and form of the ordinary world and he rem-
ains there without a body (like the one in the material world).
In the विष्णु पुराण- 
"Those  yogins who are exclusively devoted to Brahman and who are 
engaged in its meditation, reach a supreme place which the सुरी-s (Eternal
 Angels) are always seeing (i.e. enjoying)."
In the Brahma पुराण  much is said about श्री vaikuntta. It begins with these
words: 
That is called 'Parama-Vyओma' (i.e.Supreme आकाश  or श्री वैकुण्ठ ) about
which it is said that there is nothing in it (like those that are seen in this
world)."
Then it continues
"The undisputed conclusion is that it is the place known as मोक्ष " (Salvation)
and that it is the place of  Supreme Effulgence which belongs to विष्णु In the
 वराह पुराण भगवान् says to sage Agasthya, " See this world which exists for My
sake and which is not seen even by the Vedas. O best of Brahmins! This world
has been shown to you in order to please you."
Agasthya says in the वराह पुराण -
"O Lord the world that pertains to you is the best and the noblest of all worlds.
O Sage, I have seen all the worlds of Brahma, Indra and others. Oh best of as-
cetics! It appears to me that this is a unique world. It is replete with wealth and
riches and radiance as well as gem-set storeys of palaces. O Sage engaged in the
practice of  severe austerities!. I am even now steeped in the meditation on that
supreme world. When am I going to reach that best and noblest of all worlds?
This is the thought that is ever haunting me",  and so on. 
In Rigvidhi it is stated-
"They say that this Supreme Abode is the primary cause of all effects, the
highest objective of all words and the ultimate object of realisation of the योगा-s."
Sage Dhaumya speaks in the आरण्य पर्वं  very highly about that place and says
"The Supreme Lord, नारायण, is the Deity without beginning or end, and He is
said to be the eternal cause of the Primordial matter from which all beings
emerge. His supreme world is far more effulgent than the world of Brahma."
"O Bharatha (Yudhishttira!) The souls after reaching it do not  return to this
world. O King! This place is firm, imperishable and indestructible. "युधिष्ठिर !
Bow  before this world which pertains to the Lord always. In the Harivamsa
in the episode in which the sons of a pious Brahmin are carried away and are
brought back by भगवान् , who Himself says: - 
"The best of Bharathas! (Arjuna) ; You have seen that celestical world of
wonder, full of Brahmic effulgence. I am He (whom you saw there) and
that is the effulgence of Mine which is eternal. That is my supreme Prakruthi
(or Transcendent Nature) which is both Vyaktha and Avyaktha (manifest to
the devotee) and unmanifest ( to the impious). O Best भारताs (Arjuna)! The
Souls (जीवाs) enter this Prakruthi and they become mukthas (Released Souls),
O पार्था! (Arjuna); It is the goal for the सांख्याs (i.e. those who meditate upon
the जीवा  for its realisation) and for the योगिने-s addicted to penance. The entire
Universe which wishes to attain it resorts with devotion to that supreme Bra-
hman."
The reputed Brahma Samhitha narrates the serial order of the तत्वाs and says.
"Paramaपुरुष resides in the heart-lotus and He is multifaced. He is omniscient,
all pervading, and is Himself all things, He stands enveloping all things. The
pure  and subtle आकाश (श्री वैकुण्ठ ) shines with His effulgence. That Transce-
ndent  world (paramapada) is like pure crystal and replete with joy. Those
who have realised the तत्वा-s (rishis) attain this world and are  freed from the
touch of things both auspicious and inauspicious (i.e. पुणय  and पाप). They are
of the size of a त्रसरेणु (i.e. a particle of dust composed of three atoms) and are
adorned by millions of rays. Neither do they take birth in this world, nor do
they die."
All this is well-known from passages like these- In this  Paramapada, there is
a city which goes by the name of 'अयोद्ध्य' and 'अपराजिता'. There is a Palatial
mansion 'अपराजितम्' (Invincible) by name. There is a Hall of celestial beauty
supported by thousand pillars etc. In it is a couch on which the Lord along with
लक्षमी  is to be meditated upon as the object of enjoyment for the numberless
Released Souls. All this is well-known from the छन्दयोग , तैत्तिरीय, Kaushithaki
and other Upanishads.   
*17
अक्षरः  He who never wanes.
 He is calles अक्षरः  because He never becomes less; nut as the object 
of enjoyment He ever grows more and more like a stream of honey in 
spite of  His being enjoyed by the मुक्ताs at all times there. Such  is the
manifestation of His unlimited qualities. 	The suffix 'ach' is added to the
verb 'क्षरति' according to the grammatical rule that the suffix 'ach' should
be added after 'pachathi' and other verbs. The names 'विकर्मः' (79) and
'Suranandah' (188) are words ending with the suffix 'ach'.
"परमपुरुष is unsullied even though He is attained and enjoyed (by other i.e.
मुक्ताs). Since, He does not owe His greatness to others and since He is 
great by Himself, His supreme nature never diminishes."
In the शारीरक (i.e. Brahma सुत्रा-s) in the fourth chapter मोक्ष has been affi-
rmed to be of this kind. This chapter cannot be interpreted as delineating
fruits of a lower order. In that case the earlier three chapters  which deal
with the means of attaining Salvation, the Upanishadic texts which have
been quoted as authority, and Smruthi, Ithihasa and other Scriptures also
will have to be taken as dealing with those fruits of a lower order, and all
of them will become शास्त्र that have nothing to do with the मोक्ष.  Thus,
भगवान्  is the Supreme Goal of attainment for the मुक्ता-s.
*18
योगः  He who is the Means 
It is stated that, this भगवान्  alone is the natural and independent means 
for salvation. The word योग  is derived fromt he verb 'Yujyathe' which
means 'With whose help the goal is attained.' The suffix 'ghajn' is added
to form a noun by the rule-'ghajn' is added which signifies any case exc-
epting the nominative-case."
	The names 'मार्गः' (367,399) (161) and others have been derived by 
the addition of the suffix 'ghajn'. The meaning of the word 'योग' is that He
is the immediate cause of  Salvation and does not stand in need of the help
of anything else. 
"This (भगवान् ) alone confers joy".
"It is declared in the वेदा-s that He is the cause (for the bliss of 	 जीva)."
"I shall set you free from all sins."
*19
योगविदां नेता He who leads those who practice yoga
भगवान्  leads to salvation even those who adopt the means that are not direct.
'Thrich' is the suffix that has been added to 'नयति' from whichverb the name
 नेता is derived. भारता (33) धाता  (43,951) and other names also have been
formed with the suffix 'thrich' at the end. भनवान्  carries on the task undertaken
till the fruit is attained. 
"In order to bless them (I dispel their ignorance)"
"I lift them up (from the ocean of संसार  which is frightful like death)"
"Hari alone ought to be propitiated by those who wish to cross the va
st ocean of  संसार"
"Having attained the Eternal भगवान् , they all become freed (from संसार)."
"Then the Muktha becomes the object of favour for the Paramathma 	and
attains immortality.
*20
प्रधानपुरुषेश्वरः The lord of Primordial Matter and Purushah.
भगवान् is the Master in every way of the Primordial Matter and जीवाs 
(आत्मा ) - प्रधान, which is the cause of bondage, and जीवाs, who are the 
souls bound by it. The suffix 'varach' is added to the roots 'स्था' (is) 
'भाs' (shiine) 'ईश ' (to rule); and thereby the name "ईश्वर " is formed. 
The name स्थावर  (428) also comes under this class. 
	"(भगवान्) the ruler maintains this universe in which the changing 
Prakruthi and the unchanging जीवa are united and which again is composed 
of matter, subtle and gross. The जीव who is not a master himself is kept
 under bondage and experiences (the fruit of his action. When he realises 
the Lord, he is freed from all bonds).
"भगवान्  the master of Primordial Matter and आत्म as well as the Lord of
 all qualities."
"That One Deity controls the क्षार (Primordial Matter) and the जीवात्म."
In this way the Supreme Master (भगवान् ) has the power to indulge in sport
binding with His Maya the erring जीवा-s and setting free  (from bondage)
those who seek refuge in Him. 
"The Master of all beings."
"This Prakruthi, composed of the three गुणा-s (Saththva, Rajas 	and Thamas),
is mine. I am entertaining Myself, playing with it."
"An instrument for play for the sporting Lord."
"A toy (the universe is for भगवान्.)"
"भगवान्  is at once the cause for the bondage, release and sustenance
of this world."
श्री  विष्णु Thaththva declares:
"Excepting the Grace of भगवान्  there is nothing any where that can
bring about the destruction of the माय (i.e. the world) which 	He Himself
has created. This truth we say in brief."
Here are two Aphorisms from the Brahma सूत्रा-s to that effect. 
"It is only by the will of परमपुरुष  that the natural form of  the जीवा is
concealed. Again by His will alone the bondage and its oppposite (i.e.
release) of the जीवा are brought about."
"This concealment (of the true nature of जीवा ) is caused by the contact with
the body (at the time of creation) or by the contact with the Primordial Matter
(i.e. prakruthi) (at the time of deluge)."
The suffix 'varach' is used to ढow that the quality spoken about is innate and
inseparably associated with that person. By its use here, it is shown that the
difference among the three Realities (Sentient, Non-Sentient and God) and
the state of भगवान्  being the ruler and the other two being the ruled are nat-
ural and not conditioned by any adventitious cause. 
*21
नरसिंहवपुः he who is possessed of a body of man and lion combined.
भगवान्  shows the removal of impediments to devotion to him. He has a huge
form of man and lion combined, which He takes at His will, which is celesti-
al, which removes the fears of His devotees, and which is assumed the mom-
ent the request is made. 
*22
श्रीमान् He of a lovely form. 
Though भगवान  is taking a form which is unique with head and body not
 mutually matching and not comely,  He is श्रीमान्  i.e., His form is 
celestial and very charming with beauty, loveliness and other qualities. 
The combination of the forms of man and lion in him is so perfect and 
appropriate that those who have seen it would almost feel an aversion 
when they see a simple lion or a man without such combination. The
world was indeed protected only by assuming such a unique form.
"By the celestial Lord नरसिंह, who assumes a body with frightful jaws,
the fear of the gods was dispelled and the world was saved."
*23
केशवः he who has lovely locks of hair
The name 'Kesava' suggests by implication that the Lord is possessed
of qualities like supremacy delineated above and loveliness which are
all his own by nature. The meaning of the word is - the Lord who is
possessed of curly locks of hair which are sublime, soft and blue. The
suffix 'va' is added to the word 'Kesa' by a grammatical rule. To denote
the supreme loveliness of the locks of  hair. 
*24
पुरुषोत्तमः  The Supreme amongst the invidual souls.
The sublime quality that distinguishees परमात्म from other souls is
shown by this name lest some should think that there are others equal 
to Him. The word पुरुष which signifies a sentient being, distinguishes 
'परमात्म from पाकृति  or Primordial matter which is devoid of  knowle-
dge and which is in two forms - subtle and gross (i.e. invisible and vi-
sible). The part of the word 'uth', in 'uththama', which means  'superior'
distinguishes परमात्म had it been used, from the Released Souls (or मुक्ताs). 
The superlative suffix 'thamap' in the word 'uththama' distinguishes
परमात्म from the Eternally free souls like आदिशेष and Garuda.  This  dist-
inction of परमात्मा from all (The forms of them) is because of his sublime
superiority which is natural to Him and which is due to His being oppos-
ed to all blemishes, His help to all things by pervading and protecting
them and by His being the Supreme Master of all. There is mention in
the शास्त्राs that there are two kinds of पुरुषs (क्षार-souls in bondage;
अक्षरa - Mukthas or Released souls).
"Earth, water fire, wind (ether all of which are the forms of Prakruthi, are mine)"
"Who realises me as having no birth from beginningless time"
"He Who is changeless and pure"
"The supreme, the greatest among the great"
From these and many other passages it can be seen that परमात्म  alone is
Supreme.  Here also it is clear that there is absolute difference  between
the enjoyer (जीवात्म ), the object of enjoyment (nonsentient matter) and
the Director (परमात्म). Therefore the theory that Brahman itself becomes
 पुरुष and Prakruthi is refused. There are other theories that Brahman un-
dergoes all changes and wallows in the material world (because of Avidya
or Nescience, that there  is a Brahman other than the ईश्वर  (the Supreme
ruler), the nonsentient Prakruthi, released Soul and  ईश्वर  all of them get 
dissolved in Brahman and emerge from it. If these views are accepted 
they go against the declaration here about पुरुषोत्त्म and against all the esta-
blished doctrines of the वेद..
*25
सर्वः He who is all
भगवान् is superior to all, and does not depend on anybody for anything.
Still He does not neglect any one since,  He sustains the forms, the 
existence and activities of all of them. He considers them as His body 
even as soul does its own body. So, He is Sarvah--- all. (The root 'sr' in)
'सारथी' has the suffix 'van' in the sense of moving the limbs. 'सारथी'
which means 'moves' is to be taken here in the sense of knowing. Here is
an etymological interpretation of this name, 'Sarvah'.
"They call भगवान् ' सर्व' as He is the cause of creation and destruction of
all things that are known as 'असत्' (i.e. अचेतन) and 'सत्' (i.e.चेतन), and as
He has the knowledge of all things at all times." It has been declared that
the basis for the use of समानाधि करण्य (i.e.co-ordination or grammatical
apposition), of all things with परमात्म is this kind of pervasion or relation-
ship.  The Vedic Text begins by saying.
"All things are connected with Him as gems in a thread" and declares 
"He is verily all this."
	"Thou pervadest all things. Therefore Thou art Sarva, (all)."
*26
शर्वः The remover
भगवान् known as 'Sarva' because He removes the evils of all objects
 that are His body. The suffix 'van' is added to the root 'sr' according 
to the rule mentioned above. 
*27
शिवः He who confers auspiciousness
He is Siva as He confers auspiciousness on all. The word "Siva" is dervied
from the root 'Seeing' which signifies auspiciousness. The suffix 'van' 
is added according to the rule "Sarva" nighrshva. Siva. The grammatical 
rule lays down that the long vowel 'ई' of the root is shortened to 'I' 
and it does not undergo the change called 'गुण'. 
	"The Eternal, The Auspicious and Never-deserting."
	"When He is remembered, the devotee becomes the abode of all 
auspiciousness."
	"Lord विषणु is auspiciousness incarnate".
	"Hari is the abode of all auspiciousness."
	"He is the cause of auspiciousness in all things that are auspicious."
	"विष्णु who is Himself auspicious and is the object of our auspicious
 acts."
*28
स्थाणुः He who is firm in blessing thers
In bestowing auspiciousness, He is firm. The affix 'nu' is added to 
'स्था' (तिष्टति) signifying steadiness in blessing others.
	The result of the contact with भगवान् does not stop with the 
destruction of some particular sins as ordinary acts of expiation do, 
nor does it get exhausted by the granting of only a particular fruit 
(desired) like करीरि, Chithra, दर्सपूर्णमास and other sacrifies 
or like the worship of other minor deities, nor obstructed by powerful 
impediments, nor reduced in degree, nor is it destroyed. Not only does
 it completely destroy the inauspiciousness in a devotee, but also fulfils
 all his desires in many ways. Even then it does not stop with it 
(but is ready to grant more).
	The one (भगवान् ) who fulfils the desires of many (जीवाs)."
	"Whoever realises this Brahman that is indestructible, he gets
 whatever he desires."
	"When He is pleased, what is there which is unattainable by a 
devotee?"
	"विष्णु, indeed, grants all the fruits ( desired)". 
	"O Sage!  Just as a person who, though reaching a mountain of gems,
 gathers gems only according to his capacity (and not all), similarly one
 gets his desire from कृष्ण in accordance with the quality of saththva 
in him."
	"When भगवान् विष्णु is pleased by worship, one gets the fulfilment
 of all one's desires in this world, attains Svarga and a status where 
he is honoured by all the denizens of Svarga, and also gets Salvation 
which is (normally) very difficult to obtain."
	"मधुसूदन, when meditated upon, gives to his devotee unasked,
 that which is difficult to get, which is impossible to obtain and which
 is beyond the comprehension of the mind."
*29
भूतादिः He who is eagerly resorted to by all 
Moreover, He is eagerly sought after by all because He is most desirable. 
So He is called 'भूतादिः'
	The Suffix 'Ki' is added by the grammatical rule- The vowel 'आ' in 
the root 'दा' of the verbal form ' उपाधीयते ' is dropped. 
	The names 'सर्वाधिः' (100) 'Nidhin' (30) and such others also 
have this 'ki' suffix. 
	'If we do not have this परमात्म for us, what are we going to 
do with progeny."
	This is explained by the texts like the following:
	"When He is there as our ruler, we may take it that all our great 
desires have been completely fulfilled."
*30
निधिः अव्ययः  The inexhaustible treasure
He has got to be kept secure with great cupidity like wealth which is 
safely kept to be used in times of distress. Vide-
	"He  is like a treasure of gold kept concealed underground."
	"The word 'Avyaya' signifies that He, the Treasure, is 
inexhaustible and does not get diminished even to the smallest extent 
even though He may be used at all times and in all ways. The word 
'Avyaya' here is an adjective that qualifies 'Nidhi' and not a separate
 name. Otherwise the names "अव्ययः पुरुषः" (14,15) will be pleonasm 
(i.e. redundancy of expression).
*31
सम्भवः  He who manifests Himself.    
Even though He is like a treasure hidden, He shows Himself to those who
 long for Him with a great desire to embrace Him. समन्थात्   bhavah
 asya - in all places and at all times, then and there, He manifests 
Himself  innumerable forms as Mathsya, Ku:rma, वराह, Narasimha, वामन, 
राम, कृष्ण, and others. Sometimes these are also repeated. The Sruthis 
(गीता and other texts), say.
	"He takes birth in many forms."
	" Many are the births I have taken."
	"Whenever there is a decline of  Dharma, (I create Myself.")
*32
भावनः Savior .
Having taken births like this, He regenerates all by dispelling their 
evils. As declared in गीत and other texts-
	"For the protection of the good (do I take birth)."
*33
भर्ता Supporter.     
Moreover He nourishes them by giving Himself up to His devotees as though
doing like that is His nature. 
*34
प्रभवः He of exalted birth.
He is Prabhava, because His birth is of a sublime nature. The sublimity of
His birth consists in its being unsullied even by the shadow of a blemish; 
and it is capable of uprooting the fetters of all births of those who 
realise  it; thus it is entirely different from the birth of  other gods. 
Here are the relevant texts.
	"He is unborn." 
	"Learned men know the ( cause of ) His birth very well."
	"He was not born of any one, nor did He live in the womb of any one. 
By his power कृष्ण brings about the redemption of all."
	"Because of  his deeds comparable to those of the Supreme Deity,
 पाण्डव (युधिष्ठिर) concluded that श्री कृष्ण was immeasurable, 
devoid of  beginning and end, unborn, yet born among human beings out 
of His own free will."
	"Whoever understands properly the celestial nature of my birth 
and acts, He comes to me, O Arjuna! When he gives up his body."
*35
प्रभुः He who is all powerful.
Though He comes down as a man who is or some other being which is 
absolutely dependent on others.  He is still Prabhuh (most powerful).
	The affix 'du'  has been added to the root 'भू' with the 
preposition 'pra'; and the word 'Prabhu' is a proper name. This is an 
exception to the rule that the affix 'du' cannot be added to signify 
a name. 
	He is capable of bestowing fruits like the enjoyment of the 
pleasures of the rare posts of the gods and others as well, as 
even मोक्ष . This is clear from the fact that Salvation was conferred
 even upon Sisuपाla (who always abused Him) and Chinthayanthi (Gओpi 
who was a great devotee of श्री कृष्ण).
*36
ईश्वरः The supreme Ruler.
	He is known as ईश्वर because of  Supreme power of Control which 
is more useful in his incarnations than even in परमपद.  Vide गीता --
	"They are ignorant of my Supreme power which persists even when 
I have taken a human body." 
"Even when I take birth I am born keeping the power of  ruling over 
all beings."
*37
स्वयंभूः He who manifests Himself
Whence is all this greatness? Because He is Svayambhu:h maniferting Himself.
	The affix 'kvip' comes after 'bhu:' when the word so formed denotes 
a name or surety. For the purpose of His sport (लीला) He, out of His own
 free will, with His Prakruthi  (or essential nature) which is exclusively
 His and which is of the quality of pure saththva, assumes and permeates 
the forms similar to those of gods and men. Unlike in the case of the
 four-faced  Brahma and others, who are not independent' His birth is
 not controlled by any other god or by Karma. 
	"For the sake of His devotees supreme Brahman manifests itself 
( Svayambhu)."
	"I get into my own Prakruthi (composed of  Suddhasaththva)
 and am born by my own will."
	Though the two Prakruths, the one composed of the three
 qualities (Saththva, रजस् and तमस् ) and the other the sentient,
 belong to Him, still this Prakruthi (i.e.suddha saththva  is 
specifically, referred to as "My own Prakruthi" because it belongs
 exclusively to Him and is the world of enjoyment.
	In the Harivamsa in the episode of bringing back the sons of 
the Vaidik Brahman from श्री वैकुण्ठ, He refers to the two 
Prakruthis ( Chethana and Achethana) which are the instruments for
 His sport, and continues.
	"You have seen the splendour of  Brahman which is celestial and
 wonderful. O Best of  Bharathas! I am that; and that is my splendour
 and it is eternal.
	Bharatha! That Prakruthi of mine is superior and it is of two 
kinds, gross and subtle (visible and invisible). O the greatest amongst 
भारताs! Once the souls enter into it, they become मुक्ताs(i.e. 
free from the cycle of  birth and death).
	It is clearly mentioned in श्री विष्णु Thaththva after mentioning
 the five sakthis:--
	(Five sakthis are the five forms of भगवान् , Para, Vyuha etc.
	"The manifestations of the Supreme Being as Mathsya (Fish), कूर्म 
 (Tortoise) and वराह  (Boar) are composed of this effulgent substance 
( known as Suddha Saththva) and not of any other substance which is not
 like it and so counter to it, O Best of  Brahmins!"
	विष्णु पुराण  refers to the five forms of भगवान् , as "All these
 five sagthis"  by which it is indicated that they are all of them unique
 and superior because of the nature of their manifestation, purpose,
 cause, source, time, number and other things. fc
	In रामायणा it is said:-	
	"The Supreme Lord of all worlds Himself (brought about the end of 
the राक्षसाs) with a desire to do good to the world."
	"Being requested by the gods who wanted the end of the proud 
रावण, विष्णु, the eternal Lord, took birth in this world of mortals."
	"He manifested by Himself  and shone."
*38
शम्भूः The source of happiness. 
: The Source of happiness. He is 'शम्भूः ' because He causes 'sam' 
(Happiness) to all by manifesting thus His beauty, availability and
 other qualities.
	In the section dealing with 'du' suffix, that suffix is added
 to words like 'mithadru' according to a grammatical rule. 
	Vide  "He visualises all things directly", He is the cause of
  Bliss for all beings."
	This has been explained by the following स्तोकs in the रामायण
	"श्री राम attracts the eyes and the hearts of  men by His beauty,
 generosity and similar qualities."
	"राम who has a face lovelier than the moon, and who has an 
extremely pleasing appearance."
*39
आदित्यः The person in the Sun.
Next the पुरुष in the Sun is given as an example for the manifestation 
or incarnation. आदित्य  (Sun)  is the abiding place for Him.
	The affix 'nya' comes after the proper names दिति,अदिति 
and आदित्य. It has been established thus in the Brahma सुत्र 
	"He who is seen in the interior of the Sun is the supreme 
Brahman, because the qualities that are mentioned in that context 
pertain only to Brahman."
	"The lovely resplendent पुरुष who is seen in the interior of 
the Sun."
	"He, is only the same (Deity) who is seen in the heart of a human
 being and who is seen in the Sun."
	"He must always be meditated upon who is in the middle of the orb
 of the Sun."
	This passage is quoted and the Upanishad says with reference to Him 
 who is in the interior of the Sun that "His two eyes are like the lotus 
flower that has been blossomed by the Sun."
*40
पुष्कराक्षः The Lotus-eyed.
	The Name पुष्कराक्ष  associates भगवान् with the possession
 of lotus eyes which  is a specific indication that He is the Sole 
ruler of the entire universe. This is a compound word ending with 
the 'ach' suffix according to a grammitical rule that the word 
'Akshi' will take the 'ach' suffix when it does not mean "vision."
*41
महास्वनः He of venrable sound
	This name indicates another distinctive mark of His.  महान्  means
 venerable and Svanah means, sound, i.e. possessed of venerable sound.
 The final vowel 'a' of the word 'mahath' is replaced by long 'आ' in a
 compound where both the words are in the same case (i.e. in apposition).
	"His name is 'uth' ( He who is above foibles)."
	The name and form of this (Supreme Being) have as their basis, 
sound (i.e. the वेदाs).
	"He is indeed the three वेदाs. He is the charming पुरुष  shining 
in the interior of the Sun." Thus, His form is the three वेदाs
 themselves; or He is the Supreme object of worship, since, He is 
signified by the सावित्री (i.e. गायत्री ).
	Therefore it is mentioned in the मोक्ष Dharma about भगवान्  
as follows:
	"I am the Eternal पुरुष  who is in the Solar Orb and who is 
closely associated with Vidya".
*42
अनादिनिधनः One who is without beginning or end
	With such a celestial name and form He is without beginning or end. 
Since His youthfulness is eternal. He is possessed of a body which is 
eternal, and which is devoid of the foibles of birth, old age and the 
like. This should not be interpreted as signifying the eternity of His 
essential nature, because that is the same in the case of the four-faced 
Brahma and others also. 
	"He has a resplendent form and has the power of making all that he 
wills come out true."
	"He is the enchanting पुरुष ."
	"Out of the sparkling पुरुष (sprang all objects)."
	"He is of the radiance of the Sun and is beyond the region of 
तमस्  (i.e. Prakruthi, Mortal world).
	"He has all the worlds which are His creation, and endowed with all
 fragrance and with all tastes."
	"The Supreme पुरुष is to be meditated upon as having the lustre of
  gold and reached by a knowledge which is unaffected by external forces 
and which can be compared to the undisturbed dream (of a man)."
	"पुरुष who is lotus-eyed."
	There are thousands of Sruthis and Smrithis like those quoted above 
which establish that the Lord has a body which He assumes out of His own 
free will, which is like a blue cloud in the midst of sparking rows of 
lightnings, which is spotless, blue and shining, and which is endowed with
 lovable qualities like Supreme loveliness, beauty and youthfulness.
	It is further stated with reference to this form of परमात्म as 
follows:
	"He is possessed of a body which is always in the same state and 
immutable."
	"He has the mole named श्रीवत्स  on His chest and is endowed with
 ever-lasting beauty."
	Sage पराशर says  "This भगवान्  is Time itself and keeps all 
things under His control."
	"There is no Thaththva (Reality) superior to विष्णु and his body 
is beyond the sway of time."
	By these and other such clear declarations the fact is beyond 
dispute that the body of the Lord is eternal. The reasons for the same 
areIt pertains to भगवान् who is always the cause; it is also one of 
the attributes like knowledge etc. which define His essential nature 
( स्वरूप ); it exists beyond the Prakruthi which is called Thamas; it 
is beyond the region of mutations like birth and the like it is 
specifically stated that it is immutable and is beyond the sway of 
time; and also by the तत्-क्रतु maxim (i.e. the theory that the 
result is in the same proportion as the means).
	The devotee attains the blissful experience of the body of  
भगवान्  which is similar to the one on which he meditates here.
	Such is the strength of the scriptures (आगमाs) and reasons 
about the nature of the form of the Supreme Being. Contrary to this,
 no theory based on inferences can be put forward which will try to 
set up a body which is imaginary or new ( and not eternal). Therefore 
texts, which seem to declare परमात्म as formless, must be taken to
 mean that He has no body which is like that of the mortals or which 
is despicable. In fact, शास्त्रिक् texts like the following give the same
 interpretation:--
	"The body of परमात्म is not made up of the combination of 
elements like earth, water etc."
	"His form is not composed of earthly elements like fat, flesh
 and bone."
	In the wake of भद्रायण (the author of the Brahma सूत्रs),
 the commentators (वाक्याकर  and भाष्यकर) also have propounded that 
the form of the Supreme ब्राह्मन  in the interior of the Sun is eternal.
	"His body is beyond the range of the sense-organs for it is stated
 that it can be cognised only by the eye of the mind."
	"Truly the body of the creator of the universes is eternal."
	Even the Incarnations of the Lord have no beginning or end unlike
 the bodies of the worldly beings. But it is only a case of exit from 
and entry into the Paramapada like an actor coming on the stage from
 behind the curtain and then disappearing by going away.
	"This, my unique body, is endowed with four arms and is in that
 celestial Abode. O Gods! Worship the inscrutable body of mine which
 has come to the human world. I live in it for ever."
	"O Supreme God! The world has been freed from all distress.
 Come to the Heavens which is for all times protected and which is
 devoid of all defects and sins."
	"He entered the world of Lustre of विष्णु with His own body
 and with His followers."
	Such, indeed, is the secret guarded by the sages.
*43
धाता The Creator
	This name signifies the glory of भगवान्  which is superior to 
that of Brahma and others,  because of  His being the cause of all 
things, The world ends with the affix 'trn' 'भरता' (33) and other
words also are like this. The name धाता  signifies that भगवान् , 
in the form of Aniruddha, places Brahma the foetus who is the aggregate
 of sentient beings, in Prakruthi, which is the cause of all and which
 is the aggregate of non-sentient objects.
	"The great Brahman (i.e.Prakruthi) is my womb and I impregnate it."
 In the Maula Samhitha it is stated--
	"धाता  places in the क्षेत्र (i.e.Prakruthi the foetus (i.e.जीव)
 which is the seed for actions."
	"First He created the waters; and in them (In the aggregate state 
of Prakruthi ), he put in His vigour (the sentient aggregate)"
*44
विधाता The Producer
	भगवान् is called विधाता because He develops the foetus 
 and makes it appear."
	"From Him, विराट् (i.e. Brahma ) was born." 
	"There in was born Brahma Himself who is known as the grand sire
 of the universe." From these and other texts the fact mentioned above
 (can be known as being correct).
*45
धातुरुत्तमः Far Superior to Brahma
	Therefore भगवान्  is far superior to the creator. From this it 
goes without saying  that He is superior to (Daksha and other) Prajapathis
 who are created by that Brahma, on the analogy of the maxim of Danda 
and अपूप .
	Danda-अपूप -न्याय - The maxim of the stick and the cakes. When 
a stick (to drive away the rats) and the cakes have been kept together, 
and one says that the stick has been eaten away by the rats', we are 
naturally led to expect that the cakes also would have been eaten 
away by those rats, as a matter, of course, since both of them have 
been kept together. So when one thing is closely connected with another 
in some way and we say something of the one, it naturally follows that 
what we assert about the one can, as a matter of course, be asserted 
of the other also. If it is stated that विष्णु  is greater than Brahma, 
who creates the प्रजापतिs, it naturally follows that He is greater 
than those प्रजापतिs also who were created by Brahma). 
	"नारायण is the Supreme Thaththva (Reality)."
	"The question was put "Who is the Highest Deity amongst all these 
gods?" And the reply was  "नारायण is the Supreme God and from him 
was born the four-faced Brahma."
	The same is clear from the dialogue between Brahma and अdra 
and from the Yagjna-agra-हरण (Chapter on the order of precedence 
in honouring  the gods and the priests in a sacrifice).
*46
 अप्रमेयः The immesurable
भगवान्  is immeasurable by the sense - organs of those Brahma and other 
gods.
	"When the 'आ' of a root like ('प्रमा'') is followed by 'yath' , it 
takes 'ई' affix,"
	"Brahma himself declares ---
	"We do not verily know the beginning , middle and end of the 
birthless   Supreme Creator (विष्णु ) whose forms all things are. We 
neither know the essential nature of the Supreme ruler; nor this sublime 
greatness, nor His power."
	Again in the dialogue between Brahma and rudra we come across 
statements like the following:-
	" O greatest  beings! It is impossible for you, for me or for 
others to visualize Him. He is the cosmos itself. Whether He is taken 
as possessed of (auspicious) qualities or as bereft of all (bad) 
qualities, He is ever spoken of as being cognised only  by knowledge."
	"He is the Inner Soul of yourself and myself and also  of all 
who go by the  name of आत्माs (embodied souls). He sees everything 
directly in person, but He cannot be realized by anyone anywhere."
	From these texts it is clear that He is immeasurable because 
He is beyond the region of the sense-organs and He cannot be cognised 
by anyone in full. 
*47
हृषीकेशः The controller of the sense-organs
	भगवान् is called हृषीकेश because He controls the sense-organs 
of those organs of those gods also.
	In Harivamsa it is stated
	"They say that हृषीकस्  are sense-organs. Since your are their 
controller, you are known as हृषीकेश. Amongst the gods, विष्णु is 
known as केशव."   Or
	"He gets the name of हृषीकेश because of joy (हर्ष ) happiness 
(Saukhya) and effortless rulership (Sukhaisvarya)." (हृषी + Ka +एsa).
*48
पद्मनाभः He who has a lotus in the naval
	The name पद्मनाभः  substantiates all that has been stated above 
about भगवान्. He is the cause of Brahma (the lotus - born). He has 
a lotus in His navel.
	"The affix 'ach' is to be added to Saman and laman when 'prathi' 
'anu' or, 'ava' precede them and also before all compounds.  The latter 
we get by dividing the सूत्र into two parts.
	"The Supreme Creator (भगवान् ) lying on his back with face 
upwards sleeps for five hundred years."
	"From the navel of  the Supreme Creator a lotus emerges, The 
lotus which is like a circle is also known as Pushkara and पुण्डरीक. 
Chakra (the Discus) is Time."
	"In the navel of the Birthless भगवान्, a unique substance is 
stationed."
	"In the navel of the Birthless भगवान् there is one substance 
(a lotus), in which the entire Universe is contained ( at the time of 
delusion)." Such other texts also.
*49
अमरप्रभूः The powerful Lord of the immortal gods
भगवान् is Amara-Prabhu, because , He bestows on those gods the duty 
of creation etc., and also directs them. 
	Brahma himself says in the रामायण ---
	"You were lying on the waters of the great ocean and you first 
of all created me. The entire duty of the प्रजापति  (the rulership of 
the beings ) was entrusted to me by you."
	In the महाभारत it is said
	"These two great gods (Brahma and rudra) are said to have emerged 
from the sweet temper and wrath of भगवान् (respectively). They carry 
out the duty of creation and destruction in the way shown by Him." Such 
other texts.
*50
विश्वकर्मा He who is the agent of all actions (in regard to 
the universe)
	All the entire work (visvam karma) with regard to the affairs of 
the universe both before and after the creation of Brahma is His alone.
	"This universe became dissolved in भगवान् who is the creator 
of all."
	"पुरुष to whom do pertain all the acts of the universe, who 
is the first Deity, who is birthless and who is all pervasive."
	All this can be clearly seen  in the Visvakarma-सुक्त which 
begins with the Manthra - "He who offered all these worlds" as oblation 
in His own body. (i.e. All these worlds in their subtle form were in 
His body.) 
	"Sath, (the Para Brahman) Willed, "I shall become many. I shall 
take birth."
	"He willed, I shall create the worlds."
	"He willed, I shall become many, I shall take birth."
	"Then नारायण  thought in his mind about another desire  
(Creation of the world a new)."
	"Brahman which was in a subtle form before creation) made 
up its mind to become (many in gross form)."
	"Brahman desired to create different kinds of beings out of its 
body and so it willed."
	"भगवान्  with a desire to create, produced the पुरुष in two 
forms  ( विराट् पुरुष and हिरण्यगर्भ) out of a thousandth part of 
Himself."
	"भगवान् creates by His mere will and He does not look for the 
help of the non-sentient Prakruthi."
*51
मनुः  He who wills
	The creation of the cosmos was only out of a minute part of His 
will that is reputed. He is 'Manu' because He thinks or wills. 'Manu' 
is derived from the root 'man' (to think or know). The affix 'u' comes 
after the root 'man' (to know) and the word 'Manu' is formed.
*52
त्वष्टा The chiseller. 
	The world that has been created by Him thus is invested with name 
and form and the distinction as god, man, etc. is brought about in diverse 
forms and so He is called 'त्वष्टा' (the chiseller). The word is derived 
from the verb 'त्वक्षतिi' which signifies the act of chiselling. The 
suffix 'trch' is added. "The 's' or 'k' when -initial in a conjunct 
consonant, is dropped before a 'Jhal' affix and at the end of a word." 
So the 'k' in 'त्वक्षतिi' is dropped. Chiselling means investing an 
object with a definite shape. Or the word त्वष्टा can be derived from the
 root 'thvish' to shine. The affix 'Thrn' and the change of the penultimate 
vowel 'I' (in Thvish) to 'a' are prescribed by a grammatical rule. Or when
 the root 'thvish' is used to denote a deity, the penultimate letter 'I' 
is changed into 'a'. The word दीपानाम् signifies illuminating. 
i.e.developing the limbs. 
	"Thvashta, who is omniscient and who fashions the forms and 
(names of the objects of the world)."
	"The creator of the World ( परमात्म ) produced the objects of two
 kinds (Sath and Asath i.e. sentient and non-sentient with the help of 
the वेद."
	"The omniscient (परमपुरुष) having created the multitudinous 
forms (gave the forms and names)"
	"He brought about the forms and names of the beings and also 
their respective duties." And such other texts. 
*53
स्थाविष्ठः He who is exceedingly huge in size
	The affix 'ishttan' has been added to the word 'स्थूल'.
	By a grammtical rule the letter 'la' in word 'स्थूल' is dropped 
and the previous vowel 'ऊ' takes the 'gua' (substitute) 
(i.e.becomes 'av'); and hence the word ' स्थविष्ठ'. 'I shall become 
many' is the infallible will of भगवान्. In consonance with this, 
He expanded Himself. From the aggregate state which is undeveloped 
and subtle, He took the expanded form as bodies and senses of the
 experiencing god, man, animal and plant-life, as the sound touch 
and other qualities that are the objects of their sense-organs, as 
the भ्रहमांण्ड (the egg-like universe) pregnant with the fourteen 
worlds which are the places of residence for all those beings, as 
well as its sheath, and again as the individual effects which are in 
a gross and developed state. Thus He manifests Himself. Here are the 
texts in support of this theory.
	"There is no end to my expansion."(Githa).
	"He who has expanded Himself in the forms of  ether) Water, air, 
fire and earth, and who is more atomic in size (i.e. more subtle than 
the atom itself."
	"All this universe is the expansion of विष्णुu Who is all things 
by Himself.
	"O Lord, thy expansion is, verely all this."
*54
स्थाविरः He  who is existent at all times
	This name proceeds to signify that despite His being the original 
cause of all, still भगवान् is different from the mud and other such 
causes in the world. The word 'Sthavira' is formed by a grammatical rule
 which decrees that the root 'stha' (तिष्टति) to stand takes the affix 
'Kirach' the long vowel 'आ'  (in स्था) becomes the short 'a' and a new 
letter 'vuk' is added. The meaning is He exists at all times. 
	Though for His sport ( namely the creation etc. of the world) He
 accepts the help of Time. He is not bound by it. By this it is indicated
 that His nature is entirely different from that of milk etc. which stand
 in need  of some time turn into curd etc. That is because Time is 
entirely under His control, vide. 
	"भगवान् alone controls Time, Death, and the moving and 
non-moving things (in the word)." This is the truth. I tell you."
	"केशव by His Sankalpa (will) is always turning the wheel 
of Time, the wheel of the universe and the wheel of the ages."
	"There (in श्री Vaikuntta) भगवान्  manipulates the Time as He 
likes. Verily Time is powerless there." And  other such texts also. 
*55
ध्रुवः He who is firm and unchanging.
	He is Dhruvah, because His essential nature does not undergo 
any change. Though there are endless transformations, He is always 
immutable. The root 'dhru' signifies both gathi (movement) and 
sthairya (firmness) : The affix 'ka' is added to the root by a 
grammatical rule. Similarly the names Guhah (365), विषः (314), 
निमिषः (215) and others have been formed with the affix 'ka'. 
	"He who is invincible, eternal and unchanging."
	"He who is immutable and pure."
	"He who is bereft of decay and death."
*56
अग्राह्यः One who is beyond the grasp of others
	Unlike the mud, thread and other things which are controlled and 
acted upon by a potter, a weaver and others,भगवान् is not controlled 
by any one  अग्राह्य The affix 'nyath' has been added to the word in the 
end according to the grammatical rule  The suffix 'nyath' comes after a 
verb that ends with the vowel 'r' long or short or in a consonant.
	The names वेद्यः (165),मान्यः (755) and the like have been formed 
similarly. 
	"One could grasp Him neither at the top, nor across, nor in the 
middle. (top in the form of non-sentient things like pillars acrossin
 the form of animals; middle - in the form of human beings).
	"The Supreme Brahman controlled."
	"He alone controlled all things."
*57
शाश्वतः The eternal
	He is शाश्वत (Eternal) because of the continuous flow of action 
pertaining to the world (i.e.its creation etc.)
	"These actions of  His, viz. The creation, sustenance and destruction
 of things are going on uninterruptedly." 
*58
कृष्णः He who is exceedingly delighted. 
	He is called 'कृष्ण' since He is exceedingly happy with the joy 
of this kind of sport(लील ). Here is an archaic etymological interpretation 
of the word कृष्ण.
	"The word 'कृषि" signifies the ground or receptacle and the
letters 'णाह' signify joy. He is कृष्ण  since He is the receptacle of all joy."
*59
लोहिताक्षः The Red eyed
	He has eyes, red like the beautiful lotus, indicative of the 
excessive joy that is His. 
*60
प्रतर्दनः The destroyer. 
	The name signifies that He is the Destroyer of all. The root 
'Thardih' means to cause destruction, Vide-"He who has for His food 
the Brआhmins and the क्षत्रियs (i.e. all the beings of the universe)." 
	"The Supreme ब्राह्मन is the great consumer, since He draws within 
Himself the entire universe consisting of substances moving and non-moving."
*61
प्रभूतः  He who is affluent. 
	He is प्रभूतः (rich) though He brings about the destruction 
of all; because He has the eternal and immeasurable paramapada 
(the Transcendental world) which is the means of  Bliss to Him.
*62
त्रिकुद्धाम He who has the three-fold world as His abode
This name makes it clear that this world which is subject to creation 
and destruction is but a small atom when compared with that Paramapada. 
According to some Thri-kakub-धामा is the reading. In both cases the word 
Kakuth or kakub signifies parts. He is called Thrikakuth - धामा, because 
He has the Transcendental World as His supreme abode which is thrice the 
size (of this world). Vide the Sruthi-"All the things in this world are but 
an one-fourth part; the eternal Paramapada is three times as big as this.
	" The word 'Thripआd' is interpreted as being extremely large in size 
and 'पाद ' as small as on atom.
	"The extent of this world is but a hundred millionth part of His 
(form)"
	"This world is just  an atom (when compared with Paramapada) which 
is as huge as मेरु Mountain."
	Or the word 'Thrikakuth' may be taken to indicate the six qualities,
 knowledge and others, which are divided into three groups, two in each. 
He is their repository, i.e. He is endowed with the six qualities in all 
their entirety. He is known as 'Thriyugam' because of the possession of 
the three pairs (of qualities).
	Or there is also an ancient etymological interpretation, vide Mओkढa 
Dharma where भगवान् Himself  says
	"Then I assumed the form of a Boar and was with three horns. So 
I became known as 'Thrikakuth'. With that form I killed the राक्षस."
	In this case, the meaning is radiance. 'Dharma' is a separate name.
	Note The six qualities are ज्ञान  (intelligence), bala (strength), 
aisvarya (lordship), वीर्य (valour), Sakthi (ability), and तेजस्  
(unwearied energy). 
*63
पवित्रं Purity Incarnate.
	In this way the qualities, possessions, and body of  भगवान् have 
been portrayed step by step and now we pass on to His essential Nature 
which is to be cognised by means of these.
	The affixes 'ithra' and 'uththra' come respectively after the roots 
'as', 'thraj' and like  these.
	Or the affix 'ithra' comes after the verb 'पू ' (to purify) in the 
sense of the 'agent' or the instrument when it is employed in connection 
with 'ऋषि'  which signifies a वेदिक् Manthra or a Deity. (When applied to 
ऋषि the force is that of an instrument and when applied to a देवत  
the force is that of an agent.)
*64
मङगळं परम् 
The Embodiment of Supreme Auspiciousness, which is opposed to all that 
is of the nature of a blemish. The word mangala is derived from the root 
'mangi' meaning 'to go' which takes the affix 'alach'. He is the sole 
resting place of all that is auspicious by virtue of His being 
self-luminous and blissful. The word 'param' signifies the unlimited 
nature (of the auspiciousness). That भगवान् has the glory of the 
continuous enjoyment of qualities and lordship which are innate to Him, 
endless, limitless and innumerable. It is possible to establish that in 
His transcendental state he is not wanting in anything and always 
contented. He is very much like an Ocean of  Nectar, waveless and still;
 but He excels it by the unlimited Bliss resulting from the enjoyment of
 His own self-luminous Self which is by nature devoid of all blemishes, 
endless unparalleled and most agreeable. This has been determined by the
 following Brahma सूत्रा-s.
	"That which is denoted by the word आनन्द-मया is the Supreme 
Brahman; because there is the repetition (of various grades of bliss
 which culminate in the आनन्दमया or the Highest Bliss)."
	"Bliss and other qualities (are to be included in all meditations)
 because there is no distinction throughout in regard to the Possessor of 
the qualities."
	But there is (in all the विदायाs relating to Brahman) the inclusion 
of all the qualities, pertaining to the अक्षर i.e. the imperishable Brahman
 ( because of the sameness of Brahman every where)"
	It has been declared ( by the Upanishads):
	"The Brahman is Truth, knowledge and Infinity".
	"The Brahman is Bliss".
	"The Supreme is full of tranquility and nectar ( i.e. sweetness)"
	"When the Supreme Brahman is seen as tranquil, steady and motionless,
 contented and sweet as nectar, then the mind should be fixed on it for 
meditation. This is the highest state of meditation."
	Bliss whose nature is steady, indefinable and indescribable."
	The Theory that the Supreme Brahman is nothing but intelligence has 
been refuted in a hundred ways in the work 'Akhanda-khandane."
	Though भगवान् is endowed with intelligence, bliss, ability, lordship 
and other qualities, if He is spoken of as intelligence and bliss only, 
it is because He shines by Himself for Himself in an exceedingly agreeable 
manner and not because He is either intelligence alone or Bliss alone. 
A gem, the Sun, and a lamp show the objects on which their rays fall and 
at the same time they shine by themselves without expecting their help. So
they are known as being luminous and also luminaries. In the same way 
Bhagavँn visualizes all objects by knowledge which is His quality, and 
without looking for help from them He shines by Himself. And He is known 
as 'knowledge' and also 'knower'. Or if  He is referred to as knowledge 
it may be on the analogy shown in  the Brahma सुत्र.
	"The denotation ( of the individual self) by the word 'विज्ञान' 
is due to its having that quality (of विज्ञान' is due to its having that
 quality (of विज्ञान ) as its essence, as is the case with the Omniscient 
Lord."
	Therefore texts like the following do not contradict one another: 
"He is Truth, knowledge". "He who is omniscient and knows all."
	In the वर्ष्णेय अध्यात्म speaking about the individual self it 
is stated: 
	"Just as the individual soul, whether small or big in size remains
 in a tranquil state of knowledge, in the same way परमपुरुष  in all 
beings must be visualized as knowledge itself. He alone makes others
 know what is to be known."
*65
ईशानः The controller.
	By this name, भगवान्  is distinguished clearly from the bound souls, 
released souls and ever-free souls whose qualities are shrouded or
 manifested. "The affix 'चनुस् ' is added to a verb in expressing habit
 (standard of age and ability)".  The word signifies that His innate 
nature is to keep under control and direct all things under all 
circumanstances.
	"That highest and greatest Lord of all Lords."
	"Intelligence, ability and action which are innate."
	"There is no one in the world who is His master. No one rules over Him;
He has not a sign ( i.e. a body). He is the cause, He is the Lord of  him who is
the lord of him who is the lord of the senses (i.e. the individual soul); He has no
Progenitor and no master." 
	"He is the Lord of all, the controller of all, the ruler of all He does not
become greater by means of a good act, nor smaller by a bad one; He is the
Lord of all, the king of all beings, the protector of all beings. He is the bridge
and support of all the worlds so that they may not get into confusion."
	"This the supreme Soul, is the ruler of all beings in the universऍ He is
the king of all beings."
	"There was only one king for the entire universe."
	"He is the ruler of the universe for ever; and there is no other deity in
whom the rulership rests."
"The Lord (dwells, O' Arjuna! In the region of the heart) of all embodied beings."
"भगवान्  alons rules (over the whole universe). This is the truth, I tell you."
"परमात्म  is the support of all and He is the Supreme ruler." And such other texts.
	Therefore to those who prattle that the Supreme Being is under the
influence of illusion, or of limiting adjuncts, or under goes transmutations,
or His over-lordढip omniscience and other qualities are adeventitious, thrice
do I offer the oblation of handful  of water mixed with seasams ( i.e.I shall
consider them as non-existent and shall have nothing to do with them).
*66
प्राणदः The life giver. 
	The foremost action resulting from the quality of lordship is denoted
by the name प्राणद. He gives life. The affix 'ka' is added to the word. The
name signifies that He confers on the Ever-free Angels the strength which
will be conducive to visualize Him always, enjoy Him and do service to
Him. Vide-
	"He gives the self and He bestows strength."
	"The vital airs enter ( the body of a created being) along with the
Supreme Divinity."
*67
प्राणः Life. He who is also the cause of the redemption of gods
He who is also the cause of the redemption of gods.
"Thereafter He remained as the unique life of the gods."
"(If भगवान्  is not there) who can obtain the joy of this world or of
 the other world?"
"प्राण (i.e. भगवान् ) protects this world."
"प्राण (Life) is Brahman itself, because it is so understood from the sequel."
Here with regard to these two names suitable examples have to be sought
after and quoted with care.
"Then these gods with immortal lives enter into Him."
"Therefore this imperishable Brahman is प्राण (vital air or life) speech
and mind."
"भगवान् is the source of Bliss like a garden for the eternal Souls
(Mukthआs and Nithyआs) and they get this bliss by mere will."
	"He is mind-made, (i.e. can be attained only by mind) has an
effulgent form, He wills the truth."
	In श्री पौषाकर  it is said
	"Next भगवान् is associated with the celestial instruments which go
by the name of  five शक्ती-s. Greatly wise one! The five शक्ती-s are Time,
knowledge, action, desire and life.प्राण -Sakthi is the Supreme Sould and
is endowed with the six qualities. The Supreme God is the eternal lotus -
eyed वासुदेव."
	"O Brahma! Achyutha (i.e. भगवान्) is the group of शक्ती-s named
knowledge, Action, Desire and life."
*68
ज्येषठः Higly praise-worthy
When the word 'प्रशस्य' meaning praise - worthy takes the superlative suffix 'ishttan', 
the substitute 'jya' takes its place. He is highly praise - worthy because of this 
sublime glory which can never be fully visualised in spite of its being experienced 
by Himself and by eternally Free Angels at all times and in all ways. Vide
	"वासुदाव  is the भगवान्; more praise - worthy is His glory."
	"Brahman alone is the most praise - worthy."
	Or  ज्येष्ठ means "He is the oldest of all beings", since He existed before all 
of them. "Jya" is also substituted for 'Vruddha' when 'ishtthan' and 'ईyas' affixes follow.
In the सभा पर्व  (महाभारत) 
	"He is the subtle Prakruthi or Primeval cause and the eternal Agent (Karthँ). He 
is also greater than all beings. So (भगवान्) Achyutha is considered the oldest."
*69
 श्रेष्ठः The Pre-eminent.
	He is always served by the Ever-free Angels by singing His praise as a result of 
the joy in experiencing Him. 'Jya' is the substitute for 'प्रशस्य' when the superlative affix 'Ishttan' 
follows.
	"That is the Supreme Abode of विष्णु where the enlightened souls are ever singing 
different kinds of praise." The word 'vipanyavah' means those who are ever engaged 
in eulogy. This praise includes all other kinds of services also.
	"Thasmai देवा उपासते " - Pious souls who are subordinate to him do service to Him.
*70
 प्रजापतिः Lord of the Everfree Angels
	who are they and what is His relationship with them?
	The answer is given by the word 'Prajapathi'. The Surls (or the Ever-free Angels) 
are the प्रजा-s (here) who are infinitely superior to the bound souls and freed souls. 
	"The wise souls fall at the feet of  Supreme Lord who is Truth Incarnate and who 
is ever shining as a Ray in the midst or rays."
	"Him whom the wise Ever-free Angels realise in the depths of the ocean and who is 
in that great imperishable place."
	"The free souls reside in Him who is far superior to the Universe."
	The use of the locative denotes the lordship (अधिरीश्वर). The locative affix 'adhi' 
is used to signify rulership of the country. The पाञ्चाला-s are in Brahmadaththa. 
That is to say that Brahmadaththa is the protector of the पाञ्चाला Kingdom.
	"Who alone is the Supreme Deity among other deities."
	"In which eternal (Transcendental Heaven) साद्धया देवाs (i.e.) the free Angels exist."
	"Where do exist the omniscient souls, the first-born and eternal."
	"The Ever-free Souls see Him always."
	"All the gods worship वामन  who is sitting in their midst."
	The Ever-free Angels are delineated by these and other such texts. He is their Lord 
i.e. Master. He is always served by them.
*71
 हिरण्यगर्भः He who is in a lovely adobe.
	This name describes भगवान् as being associated with a fitting place. हिरण्य
 (golden) is the Supreme Abode. The material that goes in the make-up of that place 
is faultless, eternal and of highly good quality (i.e.Suddha-saththva) and is therefore 
similar to हिरण्य or gold. Or 'Hitha' and रमणीय', i.e. agreeable and lovely. It is 
said to be pregnant with Him since He is there always. Thus do some Upanishadic texts describe Him:-
	"In that supreme and golden (lovely) world Brahman exist which is free from blemish 
and from parts. It is a sparkling Luminary amongst other luminaries. They alone realize 
it who meditate upon It. The Sun does not shine there."
	"अयोध्य  is the city of Free souls. There exists in it the gold treasure. The creator 
entered the golden city which is known as अपराजित (unconquered)".
*72
 भूगर्भस्  He for whom Earth is the object of protection
	Next the name भुगर्भ denotes that He has भुमी (Earth) as His Consort. Hri, क्षमा and the 
like are the other names of the Goddess भू or भूमी she is being rejuvenated by Him 
by constant enjoyment and here in she is like the garbha (womb or child). The  वेदाs 
declare that "Goddess भूमी is the Spouse of विष्णु and ever young."
	"Thou hast  been lifted up from the waters by वराह (भगवान्)"
	In विष्णु  Smruthi it has been dealt within detail. 
*73
 माधवः 
The consort of मा (i.e. Lakshmi) मायः - of श्री Dhavah - The Husband; i.e. The Consort of Lakshmi. Vide
	"Lakshmi who is the ruler of this universe and the spouse of विष्णु"
	"Bhu:mi and Lakshmi are Thy spouses."
	Even as the essential nature of Lakshmi is described in the शास्त्रा dealing with 
the Supreme Reality, Her form which is eternal and sportless, Her Supreme rulership 
which is not restricted by any limiting adjunct. Her universal Motherhood, Her natural 
association with भगवान् which is eternal and unceasing, are all delineated in great 
detail in the. In वेदिक Literature श्री सूक्ता, श्रद्धा सूक्त, मेध सूक्त Uththara 
नारायण, Kaushithaki Brआhmaण and others deal with this subject. 
	In विष्णु पुराण in the episode of the churning of the Milky Ocean the praise of 
 Lakshmi by Indra begins with the following verse and is elaborately described.
	"This लक्षमी  is eternal, the universal Mother and is ever in union with विष्णु 
. Just as विष्णु pervades all things she also does, O best  of  Brahmins."
	Brahma पुराण begins by saying "Her power is invincible and awe-inspiring and she 
is considered as the power of विष्णु Himself. she is the Supreme Being who lives 
in the lओtus -like heart of all beings of the universe and she is endowed with diverse 
forms. Her name is प्राण or life. she is the mother of all मन्त्राs and is the eternal 
Mother of the Universe."
	Then it says : "she is the Goddess, dark like broken collyrium, is free from (bad) 
qualities and is like Ether."
	"Likewise Lakshmi is His Supreme Power and she is endowed with the quality of Mercy. 
she is called the Supreme Prakruthi and possesses the six qualities, knowledge and others."
	Lakshmi is the supreme, unique and eternal Sakthi of भगवान्; she is His second and 
 transforms Herself into diverse forms, high and low.
	she has innumerable names and is the head of the Sakthi Chakrathe wheel of  powers. 
she stands steady, pervading the entire Universe, moving and non-moving.
	"she is eternal and inseparably associated with भगवान् वासुदेव, who is the Master 
of great glory, who is endowed with six qualities, and who is all powerful." she 
is like the moonlight of the cool - rayed moon; she is one with Him, yet remains 
distinct. she pervades the Universe and is the very embodiment of all शक्तीs."
	she is endowed with all glory and qualities, and is eternal. Her dharma is the same 
as that of  भगवान्. she is the life giving Sakthi of all beings on earth. she is the source of all 
Sakthis and is the sublime element in all."
	Lakshmi - sahasra speaks of  Lakshmi thus; and other texts also must be written. 
There again it is stated:
	" All the शक्तीs that have emanated from Lakshmi are always pervading the entire 
Universe. They remain, under the command of श्री, as the cause. Therefore when Lakshmi, 
the Mother of the Universe and the beloved consort of भगवान्  Achyutha is pleased 
with some one, these शक्तीs themselves highly pleased, bestow prosperity which he desires."
	This subject is fully dealt with in वैष्णव Smruthi and other Dharma (शास्त्राs).
	श्री रामायण describes in full this topic.
	"The entire-epic poem रामायण is but the glorious story of  सीता."
	"Lord (विष्णु) gets his lordship because of His association with श्रद्धा  (i.e. 
लक्षमी )". This is the secret about the true nature of  श्री
*74
 मधुसूदनः The slayer of Madhu.	He is called मधुसूदन  because He is the controller 
 of all beings and because he bestows undisputed prosperity by slaying the असुरा-s. 
The suffix 'Lyu' is added to the root 'सूद'  which comes under the group of verbs 
beginning with 'Nandi' Similarly the names Nanadana (530), Vardhana (262), Madana,संखर्षण 
(556),जनार्दन (128) are words which have the 'Lyu' suffix in the end. The  आर्ष  
interpretation is as follows:
	"He is मधुसूदन , because He guides all तत्वा-s and also because He is the slayer of Madhu".
	Or there is another interpretation:-  He who always attracts the sense - organs 
of  Ever-free souls to Himself without any obstacle. 
	"Madhu is the name of the sense-organ. Since He draws them all to Himself He is Madhusudana."
*75
 ईश्वरः The ruler.
He is ईश्वरः because His desire is un - impeded in that boundless world of  Supreme Bliss. Vide 
"His desires are true and His will also is true."
"He has self-control and goes wherever  He wants."	
*76
 विक्रमी The most powerful. 
The name Vikrama signifies that His nature is such that it dispels all possibility 
of anything going against His desire or will. The suffix 'ini' added to the word 
Vikrama shows that the quality is great, praise - worthy and eternal. vide
"He creates and destroys the world by his mere will. When such is His power, should 
He make any great effort to put down His enemies?" And such other texts also.
*77
 धन्वी The wielder of the bow
He is धन्वी, because He always has the celestial bow, सारन्ग by name, quite suited 
to His unexcelled valour. Here also the affix 'ini' has been added  in the sense of having.  धन्वी 
indicates that He has all the Celestial weapons.
	"He is the wielder of the bow साrnga. He is हृषीकेश पुरुष and पुरुषोत्त्म. He is 
invincible and wields the sword. He is विष्णु as well as कृष्ण endowed with great strength."
	"Arrows of different shapes and a bow of huge size follow Kakuthढtha (i.e. Rँma). 
All of them have assumed the bodies of  human beings."
	"Therefore, O King! भगावन् नारायण the wielder of the mighty bow is the Creator and 
Destroyer (of the universe)."
	'The two kinds of अहंकार known as the भूतादि  and इन्द्रियादि , which stand in the 
forms of  Sankha and सारंग , are held by the Lord."
*78
 मेधावी The Omniscient.
	He is endowed with the quality of innate omniscience which is 
boundless, eternal natural and appropriate to His greatness. The word 
मेधावी has been formed by the addition of the suffix  'Vini' to मेधा  
(knowledge) in the sense quoted above by the rulऍ "After a stem ending 
in 'as', and after the words ' माया', 'मेधा' and 'sraj' comes the affix
 'vini' in the sense of possession."
*79
 विक्रमः He who moves about on the bird Garuda.
	This name signifies that He goes about here and there as He likes in a playful mood 
riding on Garuda. Who is the King of  birds and the embodiment of  three वेदाs.
	"May we approach and meditate upon Garuda of golden feathers who is
 the subordinate of the Supreme पुरुष (i.e.भगवान् ). May that Garuda 
inspire us." 
	The true nature of Garuda may be learnt from the सैपर्ण सुक्ता 
and other texts.
	Thasya - of that महापुरुष, पुरुष - शेष  i.e. subordinate.
*80
 क्रमः He who is prosperous. 
	He is highly prosperous by virtue of His being the master of the 
Eternal and Transcendental Glory. The root 'Krami' is आत्मनेपद and 
means तायन i.e., prosperity.
*81
 अनुत्तमः  The unsurpassed Vide 
	"There is no one else superior to Him."
	"Who is there qualified to compete with Him, the Brahman?"
	"Who can complete with Him?"
	"There is no one else who is greater than Myself, O Dhananjaya!"
	"No other being is greater than  भगवान्   Who exists in all 
forms (i.e.omnipresent)."
*82
 दुरादर्षः Who is un assailable. 
	On account of the profundity of His character भगवान् , like the 
Ocean, cannot be overcome by any one. vide
	"He is mind-made (i.e. He is realized only by the mind), has प्राण  
for His body, light for His form; He will the truth, is like the आकाश , 
is all desires, all sweet odours, all tastes has appropriated all this 
(set of qualities) and does not speak since there is no one whom He has 
to respect or please."
	"He is the Supreme God and is profound by nature."
	"Like the deep ocean, भगवान्  is ever inperturbable."
	"He resembles the Ocean by virtue of His profound nature," and texts 
like these.
	Here are some वेदिक् passages which are relevant to this section.
	"That is the supreme abode of  विष्णु."
	"In that Parama-आकाश  (i.e.) श्री वैकुण्ठ , which is indestructible";
	"In the Heaven the मुक्ताs attain (all greatness)."
	"That resplendent world is mine."
	"The Celestial place which is undecaying and immeasurable."
	"Come to that heavenly abode for eternal stay giving up all your 
worries."
	"He entered that resplendent world that pertains to विष्णु."
	"Time with all its divisions of  काला, मुहुर्त etc. are never the 
cause of any mutation of that sublime World of His."
	"That is the Supreme world of Released Souls." By these texts and 
those quoted already in the course of the explanation of the several names, 
it is proclaimed that श्रीमन् नारायण Transcendental World. (i.e. श्री 
वैकुण्ठ ), like His own essential nature and qualities, is beyond the 
sway of time, indestructible, devoid of all transmutations; is beyond 
the range of  तमोगुण  (i.e. the dark Prakruthi), eternal and a place from which there 
is no return for those who reach it. 
	"That is only one without a second".
	"Then there was neither the sentient, nor the non-sentient". By 
the words 'only one' in the Manthra the doubt may arise if nothing else 
exists except भगवान् . But the supreme Transcendental world  श्री वैकुण्ठ 
is not nullified by this since that world also is eternal and unique. 
In that  श्री वैकुण्ठ , भगवान् नारायण is with His Celestial Consorts, 
Sri and Bhu:mi. He is on a Celestial Couch which is in a Celestial Hall 
about which we learn from the Paryanka Vidya in the कौषीतकि उपनिषद्  
and others; Service to भगवान्  is being done by the Eternally free Angels 
like Anantha, वैनातेय  (i.e.Garuda) and विष्वक्सेन  about whom mention 
has been already made. Thus the supreme sovereignty and the universal 
rulership which is for the benefit of the world and which is for the 
benefit of the world and which is the great secret of the वेदाs, has 
been delineated. 
	This is clearly stated in the Saiva पुरुष  narrated by वायु 
	"The Lord of the Universe dwells in the Supreme Region of वौकुण्ठ 
along with Lakhsmi. The incomprehensible परमात्म is there with His 
devotees as well as the devotees of those devotees."
	The विष्णु Thaththva says  "The Lord whose body is composed of the 
five शक्तीs ( Celestial Powers) and who is the ruler of the rulers of 
the outside world" dwells in the Supreme Region ( वौकुण्ठ) replete 
with Bless in the enjoyment of  self." (The five शक्तीs (or powers) 
are  Time, knowledge, action, desire and life.) 
*83
 कृतज्ञः He who is greatful.
This name signifies that the Lord remembers the little good will shown 
to Him by the human beings in the  world. Despite the fact that they 
have forgotten the natural relationship between them (viz, that He is 
their Master and they are His servants); and they think, that all 
things belong to them and are acting as though they are independent
 due to their ignorance from beginningless time. "The affix 'ka' comes 
after a verbal root that ends in 'आ' when three is no upasarga 
(preposition) preceding it (and when the object is in composition 
with it." The names 'Brahmagjna' (674), 'प्राणद' (66,323,409,956)
 and others come under this rule. The declaration (of श्री कृष्ण in गीता ) 
is as follows:
"If a man, even of exceedingly wicked conduct, 
(worships me without resorting to anyone else,) he must
 be esteemed (and  honoured) as being indeed righteous. For he is rightly
 resolved."
In the case of such a devotee Lord does not see anything that He can 
do by way of return for his good act. 
"That cry for help uttered aloud by Draupadi even from a distance 
calling me 'गोविन्द'  that cry is never away from my mind like a debt 
that has increased with the interest accumulated on it."
*84
 कृतिः  He is Himself that act.
	That virtuous act of the जीवा-s owes its origin to the Lord who is 
pleased. vide 
	"He makes that person do virtuous acts whom He wants to lift 
up from worlds of material existence."
	"And the affix 'Kthin' comes after a root when the sense is 
that of an appellative, the word being  related to the verb from which 
its name is deduced as a कारक, but not as an agent कारक. Here it is 
with reference to a word in the feminine gender. 'भूति' (636) 'सिद्धि' 
(99) and others also come under this group.
*85
 आत्मवान् The possessor of the souls. 
The souls, who are the doers of such (virtuous) acts are His own 
property since their essential nature and actions are dependent on Him.
*86
 सुरेशः The lord of gods.
	He is सुरेश, because it is He who confers even on Brahma and others 
the small posts desired by them. So does Brahma say
	"By the Grace of  भगवान्  Achyutha, I have become the creator of 
the beings; and by His wrath, rudra became the destroyer of the beings. 
That Achyutha is the cause of the substenance (of this universe)."
*87
 शरणं The refuge. 
	He is the Refuge for all without a difference. The word 'शरणं' 
is derived from the root 'sr' which signifies protection with the addition 
of the suffix 'Lyuth'  करणं (380) ,कारणं (381), प्रमाण (430,959) and
 other names also have been similarity formed.
	He is the means not conditioned by any limiting adjuncts. 
	"Being desirous of  Release I seek refuge in that Deity who reveals 
knowledge about Himself."
	"नारायण  is the abode, the refuge, friend and the goal of attainment."
	"The divine sages refer to Thee as the Protector and the Refuge".
*88
 शर्म Bliss .
	Sarma is His name. He is Sarma i.e. Bliss which is the highest goal 
to be attained. The suffix 'माणिन् ' has been added to denote the sense of 
happiness. Vide
	"He is all smell and all taste"
	"Brahman is (Supreme) happiness Brahman is the either." (i.e.) the 
nature of Brahman as bliss is in itself infinite and indescribable. 
"Brahman is Bliss."
*89
 विश्वरेताः He whose creation the universe is.
 He creates all the organs of action for the sole purpose of 
investing the beings with knowledge, place and residence and service
 to him.
	This name explains how He is the Refuge and also the source of Bliss.
 The Universe is His creation; He permeates all the organs of action for 
the sole purpose of investing the beings with knowledge, place and 
residence and service to Him. Vide
	"From this (Supreme being) do emerge life, mind and all the sense 
-organs as well as ether, air, water and earth which supports all in the 
Universe."
	(The two eyes, the two ears, the two nostrils and mouth) These 
seven sense organs emanate from Him."
	"The various mental states of beings arise from Me alone."
	श्री विष्णु Thaththva  says  "Brahman! This wonderful wealth, namely 
body, associated with hands, legs etc., has already been created by me 
with a view to enable the beings to use them in the service of the 
Supreme."
*90
 प्रजाभवः The adobe of the Prajas i.e., living beings.
	Along with the limbs etc. granted by भगवान्  all beings rest in 
Him; in other words they become fit for being drawn towards Him.
	The affix 'Gha' generally comes in the sense of an instrument or 
location, after a root, when the word to be formed is a name and is in 
the masculine gender."
	आsramah (856), Niyamah (163,869) Yamah ( 164,870) and others also 
are governed by this rule.
*91
 अहः He who never forsakes any one
	This name signifies there is no one who is abandoned by Him. The 
ancient etymological work says;
	"He is Ahah since He does not forsake anyone."
	गीता  also declares  "No one who does what is good, dear friend, 
ever meets with a sad fate."
	Or भगवान्  is Ahah (day) because like the day He brings about 
the waking of the beings who have been in the deep sleep of  beginningless 
Avidya or Nescience.
*92
 संवत्सरः He who lives
When the beings are awake like this, He lives for their uplift. Therefore 
He is Samvathsarah. The suffix 'शरण' is added to the root 'vas' 
(to dwell) when it is proceded by the preposition 'sam' and the affix 
is treated as 'chith', which places the accent on the last syllable. 
By another rule, 'tha' is substituted for the final 'sa' of  a root 
before an अर्धधातुक affix beginning with 's'. (Vas+sara =वत्सर)
"I give with love that particular mental condition (of Bhakthi) by 
which they attain me."
"I redeem them from the world."
*93
 व्यालः He who accepts the devotees.
	"O the king of monkeys! ( सुग्रीव ) I Bring him (विभीषण), for I 
have offered him protection." On this principle भगवान्  makes them His 
own. So He is व्याल. The word is derived from the root 'ला' (to take 
or accept). The suffix 'ka' is placed after a root, the final  letter 
of which is 'आ' when it is preceded by a preposition (Vi+आ  + ला +k = व्यालः)
*94
 प्रत्ययः One who can be relied upon.
	He is Prathyayah since one places confidence in Him. For He makes 
all have confidence in Him.
	Vide-   "That Deity who reveals knowledge about Himself"
	In विष्णु तत्वा- "O Brahmin That Supreme Person (परुषोत्तम) 
should be relied upon more and more."
	श्री कृष्ण Himself says in सभा पर्व (महाभारत)
	"If Your heart understands me, and if you have faith in me, 
place भीम and Arjuna immediately at my disposal.
*95
 सर्वदर्शनः He who displays all his glory. 
	भगवान्  shows all His greatness to them (who have faith in Him shows
 all His greatness to them (who have faith in Him). Vide
	"When a person realises the greatness of the Supreme ruler that 
He is not tainted by the touch of Karma, then by His Grace he becomes 
free from all grief."
	"To Him this Self (i.e.भगवान्) reveals His own form."
*96
 अजः Rmover of all obstacles.
	He Himself removes all obstacles which prevent the जीवा-s from 
attaining Him.
	The root 'Aj' signifies movement or throwing away and the affix 
'Ach' is added to form the word ' अजः'.
	"Out of mercy to those very persons. I, who am in their mental 
structure (as the object of thought), dispel the darkness of ignorance 
by means of the luminous lamp of knowledge."
	"I will se thee free from all sins." And so on.
*97
 सर्वेश्वरः He who reaches all.
	He is called सर्वेश्वरः because He quickly reaches all those 
who have taken refuge in Him, whether they are qualified or not in order 
to avoid delay in dispelling their uneasiness, The affix 'varath' comes 
after the root 'vas' (to pervade) when the word formed from it refers 
to having the power of granting success soon, and the penultimate 
letter 'a' of 'as' is replaced by 'ई' and thus (ई+s+vara) the word 
'ईश्वर' is formed.
	"He (राम immediately obtained the company of  विभीषण."
*98
 सिद्धः He who is ever-existing
With reference to the devotees, He is in their hands. Pratthithah (321),
 Hitha (8) and other names come under the same rule of derivation. 
They are past participle forms. He is not something that has to be 
prepared by some means or other.
"Wise men say that Brahman itself is न्यास" (Surrender). (That is 
Brahman is the means and the goal).
*99
 सिद्धिः Goal.
He is Siddhi, because He is the goal to be reached by adopting the
 means vide 
	"Desirous of attaining Him, they practise celibacy".
	"My salutations to Him who is the very embodiment of Dharma, 
towards whom some adopt a unique Dharma, from whom some desire diverse 
fruits of Dharma, and whom some worship by different धर्माs."
*100
 सर्वादिः The source of all. 
भगवान्  is the cause or source of all the goals. High or low, of 
His devotees. Vide
	"Those devotees who steadily worship Thee, Supreme Purusha, the Deity,
 the ancient and the immutable, attain always their desires both in this 
world and in the other."
	"By the mere utterance of the name of  श्री कृष्ण, they realize 
all their great desires in the three worlds of this Universe."