*101
 अच्युतः He who never seperated.
He is never away from those who have sought refuge in Him.
"I have never abandoned (my भक्ताs). Because of this act of mine 
I am known as Achyutha."
"I do not disappear from him."
"Never will I abandon him."
*102
 वृषाकपिः Varaha, the Dharma Incarnate
It is being declared that Achyutha is no other than the Dharma-वराह.
 Such is the etymology given by the ancient seers:-
"Kapi is the sublime वराह and वृष is Dharma. Therefore I am 
वृषाकपि . काश्यप, the प्रजापति  (the secondary creator) declared
 about me thus."
*103
 अमेयात्मा He who is of an incomprehensible nature. 
Thus भगवान्  the spring from which flow the blessings to His devotees. 
About Him, the शास्त्राs say:--
	"Therefore the पुरुष is greater, superior."
	As revealed by these texts He is अमेयात्मा i.e., His essential 
nature cannot be comprehended by any one that, it is this much.
*104
 सर्वयोग विनिस्सृतः  He who can be attained by all means
	To the question, "How is  He great?" the answer is 
सर्वयोग विनिस्सृतः. Through the practice of all the योगा-s (i.e.means)
laid down in the शास्त्रा-s as well as those determined by one's own 
intelligence, which are very much like the great secrets propounded 
by the वेदाs, it is possible to attain Him. Or it may be said He is 
easily attainable.  Vide
	"परमात्मा, the Lord of the Universe, is ever with that person 
who realises Him by means of comprehension through his mind alone, 
becoming pleased with the enjoyment of His (परमात्म) glory."
	In पौष्कर (Samhitha) it is stated.
	"The Lord of the Manthras becomes pleased before long with those 
who seek refuge in Him provided they have pure devotion and have 
meditated upon Him, though not in the prescribed manner. When such 
is the case, it goes without saying that He becomes pleased with 
those who are fully equipped with virtuous acts and knowledge, who 
are endowed with faith and devotion, and who have been instructed 
by the आचार्याs, O पौष्कर!"
	In विष्णु Thaththva! "If भगवान् माधव accepts a person who 
is devoted to Him, though only by mind, is it possible to determine 
that only this amount of his misery has been wiped out and not more 
than that?"
*105
 वसुः He who dwells .
	भगवान्  is called वसु since He is pleased with even this 
small amount of devotion and lives in them. The roots 'वसि' 
(to dwell), श्री  etc. take, the affix 'u'.
*106
 वसुमनाः He who has a heart while thinks of His devotees 
as a treasure. Vasu - treasure; He is called ' वसुमनः', since, His mind 
thinks of them as treasure.
	"That high-souled man is very hard to find."
*107
 सत्यः He who is well disposed.
	भगवान् is called 'Sathyah' since He is well-disposed towards 
pious souls. "The affix 'yath' comes after a word in the locative case 
in the sense of excellent thereto."
*108
 समात्मा He whose mind is uniformly disposed.
	His mind is equally disposed towards all even though they may be 
high or low by virtue of their qualities and it does not proceed to 
think of their merits or demerits. Vide
	"I am the same in relation to all beings."
*109
 सम्मितः He who has been rightly understood.
	The short 'इ' is substituted for the final of the roots 'do' 'so' 'मा'
 and 'स्था' ('मा' + इ = mitha).
It has been well appraised (by His devotees) that He is in their 
hands, (as said by Dasarattha, वासुदेव and others):-
	"My राम, the lotus-eyed, is less than sixteen years old."
	"He (श्री कृष्ण) is my own son."
*110
 समः He who is of a uniform disposition.
	भगवान्s attitude is the same towards all His devotees. He does 
not bestow any thought on the fact whether the person is known to Him or 
not known to Him and whether his devotion is intense, or mild. The letter 
'a' of औनादि has been added to the root 'Sam' (not to be confused).
*111
 अमोघः He who is never futile.
	The true contact of the devotees with भगवान् is never fruitless, 
vide 	"Oh राम! A sight of  Thee is never futile. The Praise also of 
Thee is never futile. Those men who are endowed with devotion to Thee 
will always be successful (in their life)."
*112
 पुण्डरीकाक्षः The eye of Pundarika, i.e the Transcedental world.
	"पुण्डरीक is the Transcendental world which is eternal, 
indestructible and immutable. Thou art like the eye to that world 
and so Thou art known as पुण्डरीकाक्ष ," That is to say, that He is 
like the eye to the residents of the  eternal वैकुण्ठ. Vide
	"Thou art like the broad eye in the Heavens."
*113
 वृषकर्मा He of righteous actions. 
	Even though He is far above us, He always brings welfare on people 
like us in the manner mentioned earlier. Therefore all His acts are 
वृषा (Dharma i.e. Virtuous.) So He is known as वृषृ कर्म .
*114
 वृषाकृतिः He of Dharmic form.
	He is वृषाकृतिi, since, His  form also is of the nature of वृषा 
(i.e.Dharma). Or He is वृषकर्म and वृषाकृति because, He possesses 
a beautiful form and also does acts which are cool and refreshing like 
the shower of Nectar which puts out the threefold heat (i.e. sufferings 
of the world) The root 'वृषु' signifies sprinkling. Vide  सात्वत 
(Samhitha) with reference to the meditation on the Supreme (Godhead).
	"The Supreme refreshes the universe with his lustre which is like 
that of ten thousand full moons."
	In श्री पैष्कर  "With His form which is beautiful, lustrous and 
unchanging, He always emits the light of knowledge out of his body. To 
bring about the cessation of the suffering of those who meditate on him 
and  who are burnt by the fire of the करमाs of previous births, He sheds 
heaps of rays from His moon - like face and delights them."
	In राज धर्म  "Then he saw श्री कृष्ण who was seated on a great 
throne made of gold and adorned with gems, and who was like a blue cloud 
resting on Mount मेरु."
*115
 रुद्रः He who makes devotees shed tears of joy.
	He is called  rudra because He makes His devotees shed tears of joy with their hearts 
moved by His fascinating form and diverse virtuous acts. The word rudra means 'one 
who makes others cry'. The root 'रोद' (to shed tears) takes the affix 'Rak' and there 
is  the elision of the causative sign 'ni'. 
          Vide श्री विष्णु तत्वा
	"That devout person  whose eyes are brimming with the cool tears of 
joy. Whose body is covered with hairs on their ends (due to joy) and whose
heart is ever filled with thoughts about the qualities of the Supreme 
Being, he must be seen by all embodied souls."
*116
 बहुशिरा Multi headed.
	(As Anantha) He has many heads and more than a thousand hoods.
*117
 बभ्रुः The supporter. In the form as Ananata he bears the world.
	In this form (as Anantha) He bears (the worlds). After the root 
'Bhrun' (to support) comes the augment 'ku' and the letter 'Bha' is 
reduplicated."
	"He (as Anantha) bears the series of worlds and the entire 
Universe is rendered red by the rays of the gem (on his hoods) that 
pertain to Him"
	"Anantha bears the world which has a secure place on His head."
*118
 विश्वयोनिः He who associates Himself with all.
	"He has dedicated His form as Anantha for embracing His devotees 
which is common to all and relished by them. He makes all those who 
desire to attain Him, join Him."
	The word 'योनि' is derived from the root 'yu' (to join or unite), 
The affix 'nith' comes after the roots 'vah', 'Srं', 'Sru' 'yu' 'dru' 
'glai' 'हा' and 'thvar'.
*119
 शुचिश्रवाः He who listens to the pure words.
	He is शुचिश्रवाः, since, He surely listens to the words of 
His devotees.
	"O Dhananjaya! (Arjuna) I listen here to all that is pure 
and agreeable to hear. I do not heed to what is sinful. Therefore 
I am known as 'शुचिश्रवाः'
	That alone is pure which is offered with devotion. Vide
	"I ate the good and pure food offered with devotion by Vidura."
	"The night passed away for कृष्णा unnoticed as He listened to 
the varied worlds of  the high-souled Vidura-words which were full 
of dharma, fascinating, significant, and which contained good imports 
and sweet sounds and letters."
*120
 अमृतः The ambrosia
	He is known as Amrutha, because He is sweet to the devotees to 
an unlimited extent, or because He wards off old age and death to them, 
or because they never get satisfied inspite of their constantly doing 
service to them.
	"When the sages saw जनार्दन, they never got satiated as with 
nectar."
*121
 शाश्वतः स्थाणुः He who is eternal and steady. By Himself 
He is eternal and cannot be taken away from those who are enjoying Him.
	The nectar, which is the essence of the Ocean, is known as such 
because of its having just a little of the above-mentioned power. But, 
भगवान् is different from it, because He is शाश्वत and स्थाणु 
(Eternal and steady). By Himself He is eternal and cannot be taken 
away from those who are enjoying Him. He is the object of enjoyment 
to those who never think of returning to the world of mortals for 
rebirth. That other nectar (obtained from the ocean) is not only 
transitory, but can be taken in only once.
*122
 वरारोहः He who is the Supreme object of attainment.For 
this reason
    varam- Supreme, aarohanam - is the attainment of Bhagavan.
	For this reason, varam  Supreme, आरोहणम्  is the attainment of  
भगवान्. That of all else is inferior. Vide
	"Compared with that world of  the Supreme Being, these lower 
worlds (of Brahma and Indra) are like hell."
	The doctrine of the भागवताs holds that the Supreme Brahman 
has three aspects, Para, व्यूह  and वैभव.
	Amongst them, the Para is that form which is not conditioned by 
any limiting adjuncts and which is not the effect of another object. 
It is endowed with the six qualities (knowledge, strength etc.) It is 
like a great ocean with surging waves. It has a world of enjoyment 
which is boundless and eternal, and in which it exercises undisputed 
sovereignty. That again is the object of attainment for the released 
souls.The व्यूह (or Emanation) is in four forms (वासुदेव, समाकर्षण 
Pradyumna and Aniruddha) assumed by भगवान् with a desire for the 
creation of persons who have a longing for release. They are incharge 
of the work of creation, sustenance and destruction; they propound the 
भगवान्s, explain their significance and give the fruits in accordance 
with the rules laid down therein; they also teach the method of 
meditation and worship of  भगवान्, and other things which pertain to 
the लीला or sport of  भगवान्. The six qualities of the Para रूप are 
allocated amongst the four व्यूहा and each has its own form and duties. 
They are the means for the attainment of salvation. 
	The Vibhava is that group of manifestations of the Lord which 
are taken by His own will, which are like the व्यूहा-s, which are 
of the same species as god man, animal and so on, and which belong 
to the same class as His own glory.
	Vide the सात्वता (Samhitha) which begins thus (with the 
delineation of the Para or the Transcendental form).
	"The Lord has a body endowed with all the six qualities. 
He ढines with intense brilliance and luminosity, and has hands and 
feet all around. This is called Para-ru:pa which is unique, which is 
the support of all and which is all-pervasive. From this emerge three 
other forms संकर्षण, Pradyumna and Aniruddha) which are distinguiढed 
by the possession of knowledge and other qualities alloted to each one 
of them and which bestow the fruit, namely Beatitude. These are known 
as व्यूह-s or Emanations.
	The Vibhava is of two kinds Mukthya and Anuvruththi (i.e. Vibhava 
and Vibhavanthara). They are also endowed with knowledge and other 
qualities. There are diverse forms of this Vibhava and their worship 
confers the fruits, viz.  joy here and bliss in the other world.
	In them, (1) some like Mathsya and कूर्म are direct manifestations; 
(2) in some incarnations, the Lord enters into the bodies of distinguished 
sages like भार्गव राम (परशुराम), कृष्ण-द्वैपायन (व्यास) etc. In 
other वैभवाs He invests His Sakthi for some period in some persons as 
in the case of  Puranjaya and others. Three are yet others in which He 
manifests Himself, in idols, as for instance in the अर्चावतार (or 
the incarnation in Icons). Thus there are four aspects (beside the 
पर-रूप ).	
	Here an objection is raised by some  Brahma and others also may 
be conceived to be the Incarnations of भगवान्. Since it is taught in 
some places that there is no difference between them and the परमात्म. 
This should be treated, as the prattling of a dunce. If that view  
is accepted, people like us  and grass and other things also will 
have to be taken as Incarnations. For in regard to all these things 
also, it is stated that there is no difference between them and Brahman,
 Vide"All this is indeed Brahman". Moreover Brahma and others are not 
as a rule included in the class of the incarnations of भगवान्; but 
they are classified along with gods, human beings and others as created 
beings in scriptures where creation is referred to. On the contrary there
 are several statements in the Bhagavath-शास्त्राs 
(i.e. पञ्चरत्र-literature) to the effect that Brahma, rudra, 
and Indra  are different from the प्रादुर्भावाs or Incarnations of  
परमात्म; that they are mentioned as प्रादुर्भावा of भगवान्; that 
they are created by a fraction of the great glory of  भगवान्; that 
they are created by a fraction of the great glory of  भगवान्, and 
that their very existence and activities are dependent on the 
Incarnations of  भगवान्. (It is therefore established in the 
शास्त्राs that they are distinct from the प्रादुर्भाव (or अवतार) 
of भगवान् and that they are His Possessions).
In पौष्कर Samhitha (it is stated)
	"The red-eyed भगवान्, अधोक्षज, is the teacher of all knowledge. 
The four faced Brahma who is the embodiment of learning and who is 
worshipped by all the worlds, is only a tiny Amsa (part) of भगवान् 
and he is the subordinate of  भगवान्, since he propounds the knowledge
 he got from भगवान् to all in the world".
	The word 'yasya' (whose) indicates that Brahma is only a part 
of विष्णु in His incarnation as kapila and the word 'Visvavyanjana  
लक्षण' indicates, He is the subordinate of विष्णु. That the Amsa 
signifies the foremost part is stated by the Brahma सुत्र"It (the 
individual soul) is a part of  Para Brahman), because its distinction 
from Para Brahman is taught (by the शास्त्राs)."
	Similarly the emanation of the other god  (i.e. rudra) from 
Anala-साई (i.e. भगवान् who lies on fire) is described as follows.
	"महारुद्र, who is also known as Sankara, brings about the 
destruction of the universe always at the end of the युगाs. He too 
is a distinct emanation (प्रादुर्भाव-अन्तर) of the Lord who is 
अनलसायि and who is also at the base of all things supporting them."
	The word 'Anthara' in 'प्रादुर्भाव-अन्त' signifies भेद or 
difference as in the case of the word 'anthara' in the following 
verse "इक्षुक्षीर गुडादीनां माधुर्यस्य अन्तरं महत्" (i.e. 
"There is a vast differnce in the sweetness) of sugarcane, milk and 
jaggery."
	प्रादुर्भाव (emanation) and प्रादुर्भाव अन्तर (other emanation) 
have been defined as being clearly different from each other.
	"Those which are produced purely by the act of  भगवान्  
known as प्रादुरभावाs. But प्रादुर्भाव अन्तर (other incarnations) 
are brought about by 'amsa' (a small part) of भगवान् 
	In this श्लोक the phrase 'Purely by the act of भगवान्  Himself" 
(स्वव्यापारवशत्) signifies that it is the act of the unique Self 
(भगवान् ). The use of the words 'Bhuth' (thu) and 'amsa-vasa) shows 
that there is distinction between  प्रादुर्भाव and  प्रादुर्भाव अन्तर
and that the latter is subordinate to the former.
	Again they are defined similarly elsewhere.
	" प्रादुर्भाव  (incarnation) is the change of the body of  भगवान् 
without giving up His own nature. But that Reality which emanates from 
an amsa (or a part) of  भगवान्  is known as प्रादुर्भाव अन्तर (other 
Incarnation)."
	Similarly there is the subdivision of  Mukhya and औपचारिक  
(Principal and Secondary) in these. Vide
	"O Brahman! All these प्रादुर्भावs and प्रादुर्भाव अन्तरs as 
well as the creation and Dissolution, Gods etc. are of two kinds, 
Principle and secondary."
	Likewise with reference to those desirous of  Release it has 
been laid down that they should worship the प्रादुर्भाव  (Incarnation 
of भगवान्) and they should not worship the प्रादुर्भाव अन्तरs (other 
Incarnations).
"When persons are initiated into the मन्त्रs and are invested with 
the qualification for the worship of Achyutha for the attainment of 
the state of Salvation, the worship of gods other than Achyutha is 
prohibited for them. भगवान्  Achyutha in His forms named व्युह 
(Emanations) or वैभवs (incarnations) alone already mentioned, 
should be worshipped."
	The worship of  Skanda, rudra, महेन्द्र and the like is prohibited 
in regard to them. Knowing this, a person should not engage  himself in 
the worढip of all and Sunday. "(and should not bring about confusion in 
devotion)." 
	In श्रीसात्वतसंहित it has been clearly declared that the 
Consorts (श्री भूमी and नीला) Ornaments (Crown, श्रीवत्स, Sankha and 
Chakra), and attendants (Garuda , Anantha and विश्वक्सेन) are all 
instruments for the enjoyment of the Bliss of भगवान्  and therefore 
form part of His body. Time, Brahma, Siva and others are instruments 
for the creation of the material world which are conducive to the joy 
of the लीला (or sport).Vide
	"In this way the hosts of gods alone with the numerous मन्त्रs 
and their accessories, stand clinging themselves to the body of भगवान् .
	I sall now state the foremost group of group who are the 
instruments in the creation of the words, who are endowed with magnificent 
bodies and who carry out the commands of   भगवान्.
	Time is under His control. So are the शास्त्राs with their 
accessories, gods that preside over knowledge, the ocean, Siva with 
his hosts, the group of प्रजापतिs, Indra with his followers, the 
seven ancient Sages and other seers, the planets along with the 
clusters of stars, the clouds, all the serpents, the lovely bevy of 
the Apsarasँs (divine damsels), medical herbs, animals, all the 
sacrifices along with their accessories, the विद्याs, higher and lower, 
Fire and Air, the Sun and the Moon, Water and Earth. The तत्वs, 
twenty four in number, are the chief components in the composition of 
the material world. This world is प्रधान which is all-pervasive and 
non-sentient by nature. With the recitation of the मन्त्रs and the 
meditation on the Lord of the मन्त्र this also becomes an object 
of worship."
	Therefore the reference to the four-faced (Brahma) and others 
in the जन्म-रहस्य in श्री पौष्कर must be understood due to their 
being included amongst the posessions of प्रादुर्भाव (i.e. 
Incarnations of  भगवान्). Consequently the theory propounded 
by the wiseacres that the त्रिमूर्तीs (ब्रह्म, विष्णु and शिव) 
are of equal status is only to their ignorance. All this will be 
established with arguments in the proper places as occasion arises.
	The transcendental nature (Parathva) of परमार्थ has been 
spoken of mostly by the names ending with 'वरारोह' (122). Generally 
speaking here ends the portion comprising the two question and replies 
regarding the goal of attainment and their reply. The questions put 
were "(1) किं एकं दैवतं लोके? (2)किं वाऽप्येकं परायणम् ?"  which 
is the supreme deity and which is the supreme goal of attainment?
	Hereafer with the question "Sthuvanthah Kam?" (Eulogisin whom)? 
Etc. which refers to the means of attainment and the answers there to 
begin the 'व्युह' (Emanations of the Lord) Amongst them (which are 
four in number -वासुदेव, संकर्षण, प्रद्युम्न and अनिरुद्ध), वासुदेवa
 may be taken to have been dealt with when the Para aspect was spoken of.
	With the names beginning with महातपः 'संकर्षण'  
(the second in the व्यूहs) is going to be dealt with.
	संकर्षण, प्रद्युम्न and अनिरुद्ध
*123
 महातपाः He who is endowed with great knowledge.
	He has knowledge which is to be highly revered. Vide 
"of Him who is possessed of 'तपस्' 'तपस्' signifies great knowledge. All the 
six qualities are going to be delineated. Our of them two qualities 
knowledge and strength are associated with संकर्षण. Here knowledge 
is interpreted as the desire for taking in people so that there may be 
the cessation of the miseries of the world which they have been 
having from time immemorial. 
*124
 सर्वगः He who reaches all.
	By His strength which displays His capacity to support. भगवान् 
supports, like the आत्मन् all these whom He has taken in and thus He 
reaches all. So He is called Sarvagah.
	"The 'Da' affix comes after the verb 'gam' (to go) when 
in composition with the following words as its objects  antha, 
athyantha, adhva, du:ra, para, sarva, and anantha. His name 
'संकर्षण' (556) signifies that He draws all to Himself and 
so has it been etymologically derived.
*125
 सर्ववित् He who obtains all.
	Then with a desire to create all that had been drawn to Him, 
(भगवान्  as) Pradyumna obtains all through creation. Herein lies 
His greatness in the delightful display of His power to create the 
Universe.
*126
 भानुः He who shines
	Though भगवान्  creates all things, He remains unchanged and shines.
 The affix 'नु' is added to the roots 'भा' (to shine) and 'दा' (to give)" 
(भा + नु = भानु ).
	"He  shone by Himself" is the relevant text. 
	It is His virility which keeps Him unchanged (when He changes all).
*127
 विष्वक्सेनः He who is equipped with an army in all directions for 
the protection of all
	Next the Protector Aniruddha is refered to by the name विष्वक्सेन.
 Yaska derives the name as follows: "इनेन सह वर्तते इति सेन". He 
is सेनः (सेश्वरः) because He remains with 'ina' (the master). All 
beings in all the Worlds have a protector in Him for them. Here His 
Sakthi (Splendour) which shows His capacity is indicated. 
*128
 जनार्दनः The destroyer of the persons who are antagonistic.
 The destroyer of persons ( who are antagonistic). He is known as 
जनार्दन  since He destroys without expecting any outside help those 
persons who are antagonistic to the protection of people. Vide
	"He is जनार्दन	because He protects the people from Dasyus 
(demons). This is तेजस् or power to overcome enemies without standing 
in need of external help. The restricted number of qualities in the
forms (संकर्षण, प्रद्युम्न and अनिरुद्ध्) signifies that only those 
qualities are manifested, in action (while all others are latent). 
But the qualities of भगवान्  are never concealed. 
	Vide- it is stated in Mura Samhitha.
	"Knowledge, lordship, splendour all these qualities of  भगवान्  
are not in a less measure, but are in full. The supreme  Soul has four 
forms ( वासुदेव,संकर्षण, प्रद्युम्न, and अनिरुद्ध ). He knows all and 
sees all. He is the Lord of all and is omnipotent. He is possessed of 
immense riches. He is free from the knots of Karma and is not wanting 
in anything. He is a trusted friend  of all. He has all under His control, 
but He is not under the control of any one. He is beginningless and also 
endless. He is devoid of slumber and fear, wrath and lethargy. He is 
bereft of desires and ignorance, fatigue and disease. He is free from 
foibles and unwelcome things and He is spotless. 
	Those who have realized that भगवान्  is possessed of these 
qualities, have understood Him correctly; and those who have not realized 
in this way, have not understood Him. Therefore  भगवान्  वासुदेव  is both 
endless and boundless. Thus He stands supreme by virtue of the qualities 
of endlessness and boundlessness. Such is the text in every Section."
*129
 वेदः The propounder of the Vedas. 
	Again by the name 'वेद' it is stated that संकर्षण is the 
propounder of the शास्राs. "And after a verb ending in a consonant 
comes the affix 'घञ्' (When the word to be formed is masculine 
and related to the verb as an instrument)."
	(Vid+a+h (वेदः ) (By which all known).
	The Sruthi declares
	"He who taught the वेदा-s to Him (i.e. Brahma)." The Means 
(for salvation,आगमा-s (or scriptures), path, Leader, ब्राह्मणा and 
 आचार्य (or Teacher) are the various names by which संकर्षण is known.
*130
 वेदवित् The knower of the Vedas. 
	He is 'वेदवित्' since He knows the meaning of the वेदा-s without
 doubt or mistake. भगवान्  Himself said (in the गीता)
	"I am indeed the knower of the वेदा-s."
*131
 अव्यङ्गः He who is not bereft of the limbs (of the vedas). 
	 भगवान्  is know as 'अव्यङ्गः' since He is not bereft ( of the 
knowledge) of the Chhandas, Kalpa and other accessories of the वेदा-s 
which He Himself has created.
*132
 वेदाङ्गः He who has the vedas as His Body. 
	The वेदा-s with their innumerable branches are said to be His body 
since they reveal the inner-most secrets of  भगवान् . Vide
	"He, who does not know the वेद , does not know that infinite Brahman."
	"He shakes His body composed of the वेदा-s"
	Or the name वेदाङ्गः can be taken to signify that the श्रुती-s and 
स्मृती-s are His body since they are His commands. Vide 
	"श्रुती-s and स्मृती-s are my ordinances."
	"That which is due to the Gods and the Pithrs must be carried out."
	"This is His command."
*133
 वेदवित् 
	He who makes people practise what is laid down in the वेदा-s
	What is known by the वेदा-s is here said to be वेदा-s (i.e. ) its 
meaning, dharma.
	He has a knowledge of the Dharma which He makes others pracise 
and He does it as Pradyumna who is called वेदवित् here. Hence, His 
appellations are Dharma, the illuminator, and the Instigator. 
*134
 कविः  He who sees beyond.
	He is ' कविः' since He cognises all that is beyond ordinary 
perception. The affix 'in' has been added to the root 'ku' which 
signifies the act of seeing.
*135
 लोकाध्यक्षः He who controls the world
*136
 सुराध्यक्षः He who controls the gods
*137
 धर्माध्यक्षः He who controls Dharma
	The word ' लोका' signifies those who are eligible for the practice 
of dharma. 'Sura' signifies the gods who are worshipped with the Dharma. 
'Dharma' signifies the means of worship prescribed (by the शास्त्रा-s). 
The अध्यक्ष or the presiding Deity over all these isभगवान्  as 
अनिरुध्ध  who closely observes so that He can grant the fruits of 
the Dharmic acts. He also sees that fruits are not obtained by those 
who do not practise the Dharma and that those who practise it do not 
go without the fruit. Hence He is known by the names of धर्मज्ञ 
(the knower of Dharma), उपायज्ञः ( He who knows the means), 
अध्यक्ष (the presiding Deity), Sathya-Sandhah (Highly Truthful); 
He alone bestows the knowledge of all this. 
*138 कृताकृतः  The grantor of the fruits in this world and in the other
	The grantor of the fruits in this world and in the other.
	Dharma is of two kinds: (1) प्रवर्तक धर्म  (which prolongs 
the संसार ) and (2) निवर्तक  dharma (which puts since He grants 
transitory fruits to the Pravarthaka dharma (which is this-worldly); 
and He is called Akrutha since He confers eternal fruit on those who 
practise Nivarthaka-dharma. Therefore भगवान्  is called ' कृताकृतः."
*139
 चतुरात्मा He of four forms.
	Since भगवान् is in four forms ( वासुदेव, संकर्षण, Pradyumna 
and Aniruddha) He is known as चतुरात्मा . 
*140
 चतुर्व्यूहः He who is with four forms.
	How can one have four forms? The answer is 'चतुर्व्यूहः'. For 
the purposes mentioned above and for showing the forms that have to be 
meditated upon and worshipped.  भगवान् manifests Himself in four forms 
one of which is endowed with all the six qualities and the other three 
with two weapons, vehicles, banners, etc., and which are also in the 
fourfold divine states of  जागरत्  etc.
	Note The four fold states are जागरत् -Wakeful State, Svapna-State 
of dreams; सुषुप्ती -Dreamless deep sleep; and तुरीय - the fourth and 
final State. Each of this states is in groups of four. In the first group 
up external senses function; in the second group they do not function, 
only the mind is active; in the group third group even the mind does not 
function, there is only breathing; in the  fourth group even the breath 
is suspended. In the Paramapada there is a column (pillar) composed of 
Suddha-saththva material which is known by the name of विशाख-स्तंभ. 
There are four parts in the pillar from the base upwards and on the four 
sides of each part are the four व्यूह -forms- वासुदेव, संकर्षण, 
प्रद्युम्न and अनिरुद्ध . The four parts with four व्यूह in each 
correspond to the four stages of development that may be found in 
the worshipper who meditates on them.)
*141
 चतुर्दंष्ट्रः  He of four teeth.
	He is possessed of four teeth in His transcendental form which is 
the source from which all the four व्यूह-s or Emanations emerge. Hence 
भगवान् is known as चतुर्दंष्ट्रः. The possession of four large teeth 
is considered to be the special mark of a great person. Vide
	"Chathur-dasa-sama - dvandvah
	चतुर्दंष्ट्रः चतुर्गतीः ."
	(The eyelashes, nostrils, eyes ears, lips, chest, eyebrows, wrist, 
knees, testicles, hips, hands legs and heels)  these fourteen, parts which 
are in pairs are mutually alike; रामा has four broad teeth. His gait is of  
four kinds like those of the lion, tiger, elephant and bull).
*142
 चतुर्भुजः He of four arms.
	He is four armed. They say that such is the परारूप  or the 
Trancendental form. 
	"He is possessed of four arms, is of a highly generous nature and 
has discus and other weapons and ornaments."
	"He who is in a place beyond darkness (the material world) and who 
wields the conch, discus and mace."
	"He who is endowed with four arms." And so on.
*143
 भ्राजिष्णुः The effulgent
This Transcendental form is manifested as Emanations ( व्युहा-s) described 
above which are effulgent. The affix 'Ishnuch" in the sense of agent 
having such a habit etc. comes after the root 'भू:' (to be)". It is 
the nature of भगवान् to show Himself to the worshippers. 
*144
 भोजनं Food i.e the object of enjoyment. 
	भगवान्  is Bhओjanam since, He is enjoyed (भुज्यते) with pleasure 
by His worshippers.
*145
 भोक्ता The enjoyer. He is भोक्ता  since He himself enjoyes.
	He is  भोक्ता since, He Himself enjoys, Like nectar the things 
offered by his worshippers.
	"I enjoy the offering made by him who is pure-minded."
	"I am the enjoyer of all sacrifices and austerities."
	And so on.
*146
 सहिष्णुः The forgiver.
	He is called 'सहिष्णुः' since, it is His nature to forgive the 
innumerable sins of people when they become well-disposed towards Him  
accumulated sins which have been committed before or are about to be 
committee later, since committed consciously or unconsciously by all the 
organs of sense at all times and in all ways, sins committed by not  
observing the injunctions or by doing acts forbidden by the शास्त्रा-s, 
sins that are common and uncommon, sins committed by insulting Him and 
abusing Him, as well as the sins towards His own devotees which He who 
puts up with everything, can never endure. All these He forgives. The 
suffix 'Ishnuch' comes after 'Alamkr', 'Sah' and other verbs in the sense 
of the agent having such a habit etc." If it is asked how His patience 
is this much and so great, the answer is given by the use of the 'Ishnuch' 
suffix which signifies a quality which is natural to Him even like the 
coolness that is natural to the moon, water and others. The व्यूह or 
Emanations have been dealt with thus.
*147
 जगदादिजः He who was born at the beginning of the universe.
	Next the वैभवा-s are being dealt with. वैभवा-s, the Incarnation 
as (विष्णु) the second of the Trinity is signified by the name जगदादिजः. 
He is born as one of the Trinitythe three deities that are at the beginning 
of the world.
	The affix 'da' come after the verb 'Jan' (to be produced) with a past 
signification when the world in composition with it is in the Locative case.आदिजातः = आदिजः .
	The names मेधजः (759) and गदाग्रजः (770) and others also are 
governed by this grammatical rule.
	VideThe words of Brahma.
	"By the grace of Achyutha I am the creator of the beings of the world; by His wrath 
rudra is the destroyer; born of the Supreme Being between the two (myself and 
rudra) Parama पुरुष is the sustainer of the Universe."
	The gods say in the Udyओga Parva (of महाभारता ) the same thing:
	"Thou art our refuge; Thou art the first-born amongst the gods. 
Thou art the Lord of the Universe. Thou didst assume the role of  विष्णु 
for the protection of all worlds.
*148
 अनघो Sinless . 
	Though born in the midst of संसार (the material world). He is 
faultless, and so Anaghah. He is opposed to all sins.
*149
 विजयो Victory incarnate. 
	He is Vijaya. The creation and destruction of the world are 
successfully done by the other two gods (Brahma and rudra) because of His 
help. The conquest of the world depends on Him. So He is Vijaya.
	"Guided by Him in the right way. Brahma and rudra carry out the 
task of creation and destruction."
*150
 जेता  The conqueror. 
He conquers even those two ( Brahma and rudra) i.e. He makes them act 
according to His wishes.
*151
 विश्वयोनिः The cause of the Universe which is Karya an effect.
*152
 पुनर्वसुः Again he who lives in them. His name is Punar-vasu since
   He resides as the Inner Soul of gods beginning with Brahma and Rudra.
	His name is पुनर्वसुः since He resides as the Inner Soul of gods 
beginning with Brahma and rudra. Vide
	"He is the relation of the gods kept in caves (hearts)."
	Brahma says (to rudra)  "He is the Inner soul of yourself and myself 
as well as of all those who go by the name of embodied souls."
*153
 उपेन्द्रो The brother of Indra.
Next Comes उपेन्द्र  the last of the sons of अदिति , and thus the younger 
brother of Indra. Vide
	"He is the last of the आदित्या-s and endowed with good qualities. 
O King! There are twelve sons of अदिति of whom Indra is the eldest. 
विष्णु is the last-born and the youngest of all in whom all the worlds 
have been firmly establiढed."
	"विष्णु became the younger brother of  Indra." And so on.
*154
 वामनः The dwarf.
	He is वामन who came to the Sacrifice of Bali for saving Indra.
	The Sruthi interprets 'वामन' as follows: ( वामानि-नयति), "By 
His effulgence He produces joy in those who see Him."
	"That वामना  has a celestial and charming body."
*155
 प्रांशुः The Tall.
	In the same place He became very tall. "The words 'kharu' 'sanku' etc.
 are irregularly formed by the 'ku' affix. The root 'As' (अस्नोति ) gets 
the 'affix' 'u' and a new letter 'num' (A+m+s+u = Amsuh). He is mentioned 
as 'All pervading" in the Manthra in praise of  Him.  Vide
	"When the water fell on His hand, Vँmana became ex-वामन  (i.e.He 
became tall). As He measured the earth, the moon and the sun were on His 
chest. When He measured the ether with His foot. They were at His navel."
	"May that Vँmana  protect you always who in a trice became 
Thrivikrama and measured all the three worlds by His foot and shone with 
sparkling weapons." And so on.
	The वेद with the beat of drums proclaims this great deed by saying 
	"विष्णु measured this (earth)."
	"विष्णु measured with three steps."
	"This विष्णु measured this earth for getting the land (for Indra)"
	"The Lord measured the Earth in three steps."
	"प्रविष्णुः "  so He is called the Supreme विष्णु
*156
 अमोघः He who is never purposeless
	He is known as अमोघः since no act of His is purposeless.
	The Manthra is His eulogy says  "To Him of Infinite greatness". 
That is because He blessed  without difference both Bali and Indra." Vide
	"In a trice did He extend His sublime grace to Bali and give him a 
position equal to that of  Indra. And He also enabled the gods to partake 
of the offerings made in a sacrifice."
	"Bali offered the water (in the hand of वामना ) and acquired lovable 
enjoyments. Even while remaining on the face of the Earth, he obtained the 
status of a god as well as the  rulership of the gods for one full 
Manvanthara bereft of all enemies." And so on.
*157
 शुचिः Pure. He is pure since 
	He is शुचिः  (Pure) since He does not expect anything in return for 
all the help He gives. The words 'ऋषी', 'अचि' and the like also come 
under this rule. After a verb ending in a consonant, but preceded by 
'I' 'u' 'r' (long and short) and after the verbs 'ज्ञ', 'प्री' and 'कृ' 
comes the affix 'ka' (a)(suk + ka).
	"Unsullied as He is, the Superior Soul is pure."
*158
 ऊर्जितः He who is endowed with strength.
	He is ऊर्जितः since, He is possessed of strength (ऊर्जा) as seen 
in the binding and killing of enemies like Mamuchi. The affix 'itach' 
has been added to ऊर्जा'.
*159
 अतीन्द्रः He who excels Indra.
	He is अतीन्द्रः  since He, though younger than Indra, surpasses Indra 
by His lordship and glorious acts.
	The Manthra about Him reads  "To Him of  inestimable greatness."
	"Him whose exploits surpass those of  वायु and Indra."
*160
 संग्रहः He who is easily reached.
	भगवान् can be reached without much effort by the devotees. The 
affix 'Ap' comes after the root 'grah', 'Vr', 'Dr', 'Nischi', and 'Gam'.
*161
 सर्गः He who creates Himself.
	He is Sargah since He creates Himself so that His lotus feet which 
measured the three worlds may be easy to grasp.
	"He entrusts Himself to His friends."
*162
 धृतात्मा The saviour of the Souls.
	By thus giving himself up, all the souls have been preserved by Him 
and so He is धृतात्मा.
*163
 नियमः The controller. 
	He is Niyamah since even powerful persons like Bali were controlled 
by Him.  The root 'Yam' with the propositions 'Sam', 'Upa', 'Ni' and 'Vi' 
has affix 'Ap' added to it optionally. (ni + yam + a = niyamah).
*164
 यमः The Ruler. 
	His name is यमः  since He rules all so that all of them are without 
trouble and happy. Vide 
	"He who rules the earth from within".
	"He who rules the self from within."
	Such is the statement in अन्तर्यामी Brahma (भृहदारण्यक उपनिषद्) 
with reference to every one of the तत्वा-s (Realities). Vide 
	"भगवान् controls all beings in the Universe from within the 
sphere of  the Sun and He is the ruler over all. He is within your 
heart and if you have no quarrel with Him you need not go (on a piligrimage) to the 
Ganga or to कुरुक्षेत्र." 
*165
 वेद्यो He who can be realised. 
	Thus He takes birth and reveals His greatness which otherwise 
cannot be cognised by the senses. Therefore He is वेद्यः  He can be 
realised by all. 
*166
 वैद्यः The knower of Vidya or Knowledge. 
He is called Vaidyah, because He learns or knows the Vidya (knowledge) 
which removes the contact with the संसार of those who worship Him. The 
affix 'An' comes after a word denoting some subject of study in the sense 
of 'who has studied that' or 'who understands that' when it is the object 
of the verbs 'learns' or knows. Vide
	'Heaps of sinful acts of a person even as big as मेरु and मन्दार 
mountains will perish if he resorts to केशव even as terrible diseases 
will perish by resorting to a physician."
*167
 सदा योगी he who is ever wide awake. 
	Thus भगवान् is ever awake when all are in slumber." 
*168
 वीरहा The slayer of storng men of wicked nature
	He is known as वीरहा  He is the slayer of the disputatious men who 
put up fallacious arguments and who try to prevent men from meditating on 
Him.
	The suffix 'Kvip' is added to the root 'han' (to kill), with some 
nouns in the Accusative case. The rule that prescribes, this suffix to 
the words Brahman, Bhrओna and Vritha is only general and can be extended 
to others also like 'वीर'.
	The names कामाहा (295), क्रोधाहा (315), भगाहा  (564) and the like 
have been similarly formed.
	"They say the Universe  is unreal, without any foundation and without 
the Lord."
	The relevant section in गीता begins with this श्लोका and concludes 
with.
	"These haters, cruel, the worst ofmen and unholy, I throw continually 
into the cycles of  birth and death, into none other than demoniacal wombs."
*169
 माधवो The propounder of the knowledge of the Supreme being.
He is माधवा since, He propounds the true knowledge about Himself as 
the Supreme Being, The knowledge of Hari is called 'मा'. Thou art the 
master of that knowledge. Therefore, Thou art known as माधव . It has 
been stated that 'Dhavah' means 'Lord'."
	"O भारत! Know that He is called माधव since He is endowed with 
mauna, (मा ), ध्यान  (dha) and योग (va) (silence, meditation and practice)"
*170
 मधुः Sweet like honey.
	He is called Madhu since He is sweet to those who have attained true
 knowledge.
	The affix 'u' and the augment 'gu' come after the roots 'phal', 
'Pँth', 'Nam' 'Man' and 'Jan'. The word 'Madhu' is derived from the root
 'Man' (to think) which takes the affix 'u' in the sense of being tasteful.
 'Dha' is the substance for 'n'.
	"I am indeed inexpressily dear to the ज्ञानि (the man of wisdom)"
	The Six celestial Qualities of भगवान् .
*171
 अतीन्द्रियो He who is beyond the range of the sense organs.
	Next the Sage proceeds to examine the essential nature of भगवान्  
who is sweet as the ocean of honey and endowed with qualities with the 
object of delineating the six important qualities which are the essence 
of the forms Para, व्यूह  and वैभव.
भगवान् 	is अतीन्द्रियाः , because He is beyond the range of the 
instruments of knowledge. 
*172
 महामायः He who is possessed of Maayaa or wonderful power of
   enchantment.
	How is He (said to be अतीन्द्रिय )? He has a great माया which like 
a curtain conceals Him and which charms the minds of all those in the 
world who are not devoted to Him. Vide
	"He is enveloped by the माया  of the qualities."
	It will be shown later that this माया is not illusion.
*173
 महोत्साहो He of great enthusiasm
	This name postulates the quality of lordship in भगवान्  is 
distinguished from the ईश्वर of the Sankhya-system who though endowed 
with knowledge, is yet a non-doer of acts, who is lethargic and indifferent.
भगवान्  has a great  Zeal for doing acts which signify His lordship. 
Because of this ardour for work भगवान्  does all acts by a mere fraction 
of His independent will. There is no one above to direct Him. He is also 
skilful in creating newer and newer objects of enjoyment in countless 
numbers and sizes, the means and methods of experiencing them for the 
sake of persons in accordance with the nature of their  कर्मा-s, big or 
small, experienced or yet to be experienced. Though He is omnipotent 
and independent He creates things endowed with qualities that are natural 
to them and possessed by them before. It is only a tiny part of an atom 
of a drop of His infinite ability that is seen  in the capacity of Brahma 
and others to assume bodies of the size of an atom and so on. 
*174
 महाबलः  He of immense strength. 
	He is महाबलः (possessed of great strength) which distinguished Him 
from other agents who are always in need of external aasistance. Because 
of this strength He is never fatigued though engaged in unlimited activities.
He stands firm on His own greatness and does not stand in need of external 
support. He bears all things without effort like His ever blossoming 
splendour which can never be checked.
	The Maulas state "He makes the many multitudinous."
	It is only a particle of this strength that is seen in water, air, 
earth and other things.
*175
 महाबुद्धिः He of infinite knowledge.
	He is Maha-buddhih (possessed of great knowledge) to refute the 
school of thought which holds the view that the cause of the world is 
not omniscient. The Sage says.
	This omniscience of the Supreme Being is with reference to all 
objects far and near, in all places, at all times and of all nature. 
It is true because it is natural to Him and not  tainted by pain;  it 
is not the effect of Karma or desire. It does not stand in need of eye 
and other instruments of knowledge. If He uses His organs of sense, it 
is because of His free will. He is lotus-eyed and the hearer of what is 
pure and faultless. He may use His eyes to see and ears to hear. Nor is 
there any restriction that the रूप (form), rasa (taste) and the like 
can be cognised only by a particular sense-organs. It is well-known that 
the serpent amongst the creatures sees and hears with the eye alone. If 
that is the case (with the beings of lower strata) how will it be 
impossible for the Omnipotent God to do it?
	So has it been said in जयाख्य (Samhitha)  
	"Just like the serpent which sees and hears with its eye, 
this (भगवान् ) can hear by all (His sense-organs)."
	His perception is direct and clear like the vision of the 
अमलक -fruit laid on the palm; and it is infallible since, He 
can accomplish any thing. Vide
	"He has eyes on all sides and faces on all sides."
	"He sees without eyes and hearts without ears."
	"He has everywhere eyes, heads and mouths"
	The venerable ँcharya Natthamuni has said:
	"Who sees directly by perception and of His own accord all things 
simultaneously."
	Some people spoke in contempt of the Omniscient Being by saying 
	"If it is imagined on the basis of one instrument of knowledge that 
there is an omniscient being, then that being can as well grasp by the 
eye alone sweetness and all such objects of sense-organs."
	That is with reference to an omniscient being arrived at by 
inference (अनुमान) by the बौद्धा-s. For that is the context there. 
Otherwise it will be opposed to the शास्त्रा-s.
	"If you say that the eternity of the Supreme Being is only a 
praise, then it will amount to saying that it is not eternal."
	Similarly the omniscience propounded by the शास्त्रा-s will be 
nullified. Therefore the statement should be taken to signify something 
else or as incorrect. Moreover it is not correct to say that the statement 
in the शास्त्रा-s about the omniscience (of the Supreme being ) is fictitious 
and wrong; for we see in the world that in the case serpents and others 
of that species, in the case of  crows, owls, eagles and  other birds, 
in the case of men who have attained perfection in the mystic मन्त्रा-s,
 and in the case of those who are proficient in medicine and in the 
practice of austerities, there is some uniqueness in the functions of 
their sense-organs of knowledge in a greater or less degree. The same 
can be said of the wonderful nature of the other qualities of भगवान् . 
The knowledge in souls in bondage, released souls and Over-free Angels 
is but a small fraction of this quality of  भगवान् . 
*176
 महावीर्यो He of great virility.
	 भगवान्  has the quality of great virility by virtue of which He 
remains unchanged though there may be a cause for change. This quality 
distinguishes Him from milk and other things which become transformed into 
curd etc. Like the smell of the A garu (tfee), the rust of animals, musk, 
flowers etc. He produces boundless effects by His very presence or by His 
vicinity.  Vide
	"Smell by its very presence produces agitation in the mind without 
any other aid. So is परमात्म (the Supreme Lord.)"
	It is by a tiny part of this quality that the minds of the great 
योगिन्-s are ready and do not get distracted. 
*177
 महाशक्तिः Of immense power
	The name महाशक्तिः signifies that He has immense power to be the 
material and sentient cause as distinguished from the doctrine of the 
school of  पाशुपता-s that ईश्वरा is only the sentient cause and not 
the material cause as well. This power brings about the production of 
all things at all times whether there  are helpful accessories or not; 
it is capable of putting into use all the mean; it is capable of changing 
the Prakruthi which has been assumed as a part of His Body. When the 
capacity of Insects like spider and others to be not only the sentient 
cause but material cause also is undisputed, how can this power of an 
omniscient Supreme Being be a point of dispute? The change that is going 
on in प्रधाना  (Primordial Matter) curd, milk etc. every moment, is due 
to a particle of this power of भगवान् . 
*178
 महाद्युतिः  He of great splendour. 
	The  name महाद्युतिः  indicates that He has a great splendour which 
distinguiढes Him from the other causes in the world which stand in need 
of assistance and that he does not require such a help. This effulgence 
is opposed to darkness (ignorance), both inner and outer and it is 
fascinating for those who are well-disposed and frightful for others. 
The lustre in the Sun, gem etc. is but a small drop of this.
	By the use of the adjective 'mahath' (great) in these six names 
(173-178) it is indicated that these qualities produced by a tiny part 
innumerable actions great and small, and the remaining parts remain 
unused since there is no scope for  further action; and like the great 
rivers that flow towards the ocean carrying with them the excessive 
waters, these qualities shine in the भगवान्  who is unlimited. Very 
well-known is this greatness of  भगवान् . Vide
	"His supreme power is revealed, indeed, as being varied, natural 
and as being associated with knowledge, strength and action."
	"He is the unique collection of splendour, strength, sovereignty, 
great powers of knowledge, excellent heroism and other such qualities."
	"Knowledge, power, strength, lordship, heroism, splendourthese in 
all their entirely are expressed by the word ' भगवान्' and only evil 
(undesirable) qualities and other things are not." भगवत्- शास्त्रा-s 
(i.e.पञ्चरात्र संहिता-s) deal with this topic in all their entirely' 
Amiability, Love and other innumerable qualities also are treated as being 
included in these six qualities with a definite purpose. 
*179
 अनिर्देश्यवपुः  He who is possessed of an indescribable body.
	He has a body endowed with these six qualities and so He is अनिर्देश्यवपुः
 Vide
	"The God who has a body endowed with six qualities and who has 
brilliance like that of glowing fire."
	This has been indicated in the मौल संहित also
	"In भगवान्  we see intellect, mind, body and limbs. From the 
texts of the शास्त्रा-s also भगवान्  is seen as being possessed of 
intellect, mind, body and limbs."
	"These who are possessed of intellect, mind, body and limbs, 
are beings whose bodies are formed by the seven great elements 
(mahath, अहंकार  and पञ्च भूता-s). "Of what substance is 
the body of  भगवान्  composed?" A doubt is raised if  भगवान् 's 
body also is composed of these elements; and the reply is given  
" भगवान् 's body is composed of  भगवान् 's form itself." Of what 
is  भगवान्  Himself composed? He is knowledge incarnate, lordढip 
incarnate, power  incarnate, like the glowing ember, of the burning 
khadira and silk-cotton trees that is fire on all sides, like pure 
honey, when drunk, that is fire on all sides, like pure honey, when 
drunk, that is sweet on all sides; like a bar of gold that is being 
polished is gold all round; and like a mansion that will be attractive 
when observed from all angles. Similarly  भगवान्  is entirely lordship 
and power in full. Whatever He wants to become He becomes. " This is 
going to be declared as the topic of पञ्चोपनिषद् (five upanishads). 
Just as the lustre of a gem is set off by a leaf of gold in the 
background, the splendour of  भगवान्  endowed with six qualities 
is only enhanced by Pure Saththvaguण, but not, concealed as is 
the case with other objects by the Thriguणa (i.e. Prakruthi composed
 of the three qualities सत्वा, रजस्  and तमस् .) This is the
 truth about भगवान् ."
	विष्णु पुरुष says  "Regarding His form, color etc. There
 is nothing that can be compared with them." That is to say His 
body is beyond comparison.
*180
 श्रीमान् Possessed of beauty.
	He is every beautified by the rich and celestial ornaments suited 
to His body. 
*181
 अमेयात्मा He of an incomprehensible nature.
	Quite consistent with the diverse qualities and form described 
thus He has supreme majestry like the deep ocean. 
*182
 महाद्रिधृत् The bearer of the great mountain.
	Next it is described by the name महाद्रि द्रुत्  that he acts as 
He likes in a playful mood quite suitably to His inscrutable nature.
	At the time of the churning (of the Milky Ocean) He bore ( on 
His back) the great Mandara mountain.
*183
 महेष्वासो The discharger of great arrows.
	' महान्  means enchanting; and ' इष्वासः' means discharging ( 
the arrows). The way in which He discharged arrows at the time of 
building a bridge across the ocean (binding him) and at the time of 
the destruction of the ten-headed रावण was really charming.
*184
 महीभर्ता The bearer of the earth.
	He is महीभर्ता, because He always supports the lovely Earth 
(as कूर्मा ).
*185
 श्रीनिवासः In whom Lakhshmi resides
	This name refers to divine sports like the sweet words He spoke 
to Lakshmi and the place He gave Her on His chest when she emerged from 
the ocean when it was churned. (185) 
*186
 सतां गतिः The refuge of the pious. 
	He who always does what is pleasing to those who bow before Him 
by means of acts which He does as He likes.
*187
 अनिरुद्धः The irresistible
	"He is called Aniruddha, because He does unlimited charming acts 
which are life-giving to the beings in the world and which repel all 
opposition."
	The मौला-s say  "भगवान्  Aniruddha has unlimited exploits."
*188
 सुरानन्दो Source of delight to the gods.
	This name refers to the Hamsa Incarnation (स्वान् ) of Aniruddha who 
is the source of all अवतारा-s. Since भगवान्  is their saviour in times 
of distress, the gods take delight in Him.
*189
 गोविन्दः The recipient of words (of praise). 
	He is called गोविन्द  since, he receives words of praise from the Gods, 'Gओ' means 
words (of praise) and 'vind' the receiver. The suffix 'sah' is added to form the 
noun along with 'गो'  meaning words, by a grammatical rule. He was praised by the 
gods for the help rendered to them.
*190
 गोविदां पतिः The protector of those who knows the words. 'Go' here 
means the words of Vedas. Since He is the protector of those who knows 
the words of the vedas and who worship Him by the Gnanayagna i.e.,sacrifice
in the form of knowledge, He is Govidaam Patih
	'गो' here means the words of the वेदा-s. Since He is the protector 
of those who know the words of  the  वेदा-s and who worship Him by the 
ज्ञानयज्ञ  (i.e. sacrifice in the form of knowledge), He is गोविदां पतिः 
 Vide
	"One should meditate upon the आत्मा as the Hamsa (Swan) Incarnation 
who enjoys the knowledge of sacrifice offered to Him."
*191
मरीचिः Ray of light. 
	He is called मरीची  because He shows His faultless form even to 
those who are blind even from their birth.
	"The affix 'ईचिः' is added to the root 'mr' which signifies shining 
and 'kan' (to sound)". The form that is prescribed for meditating on Him 
is described as:
	"He of charming lustre like the Kunda flower and the moon"
*192
 दमनः Dispeller. 
	By the Ganga-like streams of His lustre He dispels the heat 
(sufferings) of the संसार  (material world).
*193
 हंसः Swan
	Who is like this? ( भगवान्  as ) Hamsa. The word Hamsa is also 
derived from the root 'Han' (to move) as "He moves in an enchanting 
manner" or He smiles beautifully. The loose formation of the word with 
the addition of the letters as  hamsa is by the grammatical rule 'प्रिषोदर 
etc." Vide
	"To the great Hamsa who is pure. Who is of  सत्व quality, and 
who is possessed of an auspicious body (that redeems those who meditate 
on it.") 
*194
 सुपर्णो Possessed of lovely feathers.
	According to the etymologists. 'सुपर्ण' is interpreted as 'one 
possessed of charming feathers' or 'one who leads men to the other shore 
across the ocean of संसार '.
*195
 भुजगोत्तमः The master of Serpent.
	In the names पद्मनाभः   and अमरप्रभुः  (48 and 49) mention was 
made of  पद्मनाभः  who is  अनिरुद्ध , the last of व्यूहा-s ( or Emanations). 
Here, by the name  भुजगोत्तमः , that पद्मनाभः  is being referred to who
is the first among the manifestations of भगवान् . He is उत्तम 
(the master) of Bhujaga (the serpent आदिशेष ); i.e. He who sleeps on 
the couch which is the body of Anantha (the serpent). The rule is laid 
down for His meditation as 'The great Lord possessed of a body of 
celestial consciousness lying on the Anantha-couch in mind."
	In आरण्य-पर्व  (महाभारत ):-
	"भगवान् विष्णु  slept all alone on the waters on the vast body 
of (Anantha) the serpent who is possessed of limitless splendour."
	In the विष्णु पुराण  " भगवान्  sleeps on the couch viz. the 
Serpent having become great by swallowing the three worlds."
196. हिरण्यनाभः He who is possessed of a lovely navel.
	He is पद्मनाभ .
*197
 सुतपाः He who is possessed of Supreme knowledge.
	'Thapah' signifies knowledge which is an eye-witness of all that 
has been absorbed in Him.
	In the Manthra for his Meditation it is said
	"The great Lord possessed of divine consciousness."
*198
 पद्मनाभः Lotus navelled
पद्मनाभः is as before (48). His state as हिरण्यनाभ  and 
पद्मनाभ (196,198) is described in Brahma (पुराण ).
	"In times of yore out of the navel of the Lord who was sleeping, 
there arose, by His will, a divine and big, eight petalled lotus which 
was lovely and Earthern. Its divine and golden peri-care is said to be 
Mount Meru."
*199
 प्रजापतिः The Lord of beings. 
	He is the Lord of all beings including Brahma born of that lotus. 
This should be taken as pertaining to the creation and destruction that 
take place periodically.
*200
 अमृत्युः The foe of Mrityu or Death
	Here begins Nrusimha - Incarnation. He is the foe of  Death since, 
He is Death for the god, the death. 
