*801
. अर्कः He Who is praised. 
	He is Arka since, He is praised by them as follows : "Oh! A great 
soul and higly virtuous one'.
The word 'arka' is derived from the root 'ark' (to praise).
*802
 वाजसनिः He who advocated eating much. 
	By His atheistic teaching He created a tate in them for the 
enjoyment of pleasures in this world itself. He is वाजसनिः . It is
the vow of a क्षपणक  (a Buddhist monk) that he should devour mouthfuls 
of curd-rice every day in the morning.
	"The affix 'ini' is added to all roots." 'वाजसनि  is derived 
from the word 'वाजा  (food) and the root 'san' (to partake).
*803
 शृङ्गी He who has a horn.
	He has in his hand a bunch of peacock-feathers as an emblem of 
his doctrine of Ahimsa. It was almost like a horn. Hence He is ' शृङ्गी'.
	"He who has the peacock-feather (in His hand.")
*804
 जयन्तः The Conqueror.
	He is Jayantha, because He conquered the advocates of Theism 
by means of His false doctrines that the world is an illusion and 
that the soul is nothing but knowledge. The word 'Jayantha' is 
derived from the root 'ji' (to conquer).
	"The affix 'jhas' comes after the roots 'tr', 'bhoo', 'vah', 
'vas', 'bhaas', 'saadh', 'gand', 'mand' ji', and 'nand'."
*805
 सर्वविज्जयी The conqueror of those who had learnt all things.
	How did He make them believe His doctrines which were opposed to 
authoritative texts? सर्वविज्जयी --By His sweet words and convincing 
arguments He defeated even men of great learning (and they accepted what 
He said.)
*806
 सुवर्णबिन्दुः He who concealed the truth with words of sweet letters
	By His all-round power, He defeated Teism by His very clever and sweet words. The 
word 'bindu' is derived from the root 'bidi' (to conceal).
*807
 अक्षोभ्यः he Who could not be confounded. 
	Being possessed of inpenetrable thoughts as he was, He could not be
 influenced or confounded (by other).
*808
 सर्ववागीश्वरेश्वरः The Lord of all who have a mastery over all words.
	Therefore He was very proficient in disputations and eloquent in 
speaking. Vide :
	"Just like Bruhaspathi, He (श्री राम ) was very proficient in 
advancing arguments one after another."
*809
 महाह्रदः The vast lake. 
	He was a wide lake in which the evil-doers sink once for all never 
to rise up, as stated in the गीत -
	"I hurl the impious men continuously into the cycles of births 
and deaths in demoniacal wombs."
	Again He was a lake in which virtuous men bathe again and again, 
but never get satiated. So He was महाह्रदः.
	The word 'hrada' is derived from the root 'hrad' (
to make an indistinct sound). The lake is called 'hrada' since 
its waters are ever producing an indistinct noise.  The long vowel 'आ' 
of 'hrada' is shortended as 'a' (in hrada) irregularly according to the 
rule 'prishodara etc".
*810
 महागर्तः The Great Pit. 
	In this way He sends into the great pits of Hell like Raurava all 
those who have lost their souls by the knowledge they have which is 
contrary to the teachings of the वेदा-s completely or partially. So He 
is called महागर्तः . Vide :
	"O Arjuna! The Slayer of the foes! Persons who have no faith in 
the Dharma taught by Me do not attain Me and continue to tread the path 
of the world of death."
	So far the quality of भगवान्  as the punisher of those of Asuric 
temperament who voilate His ordinances has been described. Next the 
quality of  भगवान्  as the bestower of grace on those who are born 
with divine characteristics and who follow the path of the Scriptures 
is going to be delineated.
*811
 महाभूतः He who considers great men as His own. 
	The great and pious men are treated by  भगवान्  as His own. Vide :
	"But the great souls do attain me. O Arjuna!"
*812
 महानिधिः  He  who has great wealth. 
	The high-souled persons are very much liked by Him like a treasure. 
So He is known as महानिधिः . Vide
	"But those devotees who adopt this nectar of virtuous conduct as 
taught above, who are full of faith and who hold Me as the highest--they 
are exceedingly dear to Me)."
*813
 कुमुदः He who is with delight on the Earth.
	'Kau'--Even in this world of Prakrithi He is happy in the 
company of the devotees. So He is Kumudah.
*814
 कुन्दरः The bestower of the knowledge of the Supreme Reality.
	He is Kundara, because He gives the world ('ku') (of Salvation); or 
He is flawless like the 'Kunda' flower; or 'Kundam' is the knowledge of 
the Supreme Reality; that He bestows. ('rathi'). The word 'Kundara' 
is irregularly formed like 'प्रषोदरादि '.
	'The affix 'a' comes after a verbal root ending in long 'aa' 
when there is no preposition preceding it and when the object is in 
composition with it."
	"I bestow on them that knowledge (by which they attain Me)."
*815
 कुन्दः He who grants the successive stages of higher knowledge.
     	To those who have raised themselves by going up the steps of 
knowledge, non-attachment and so on. He allots the top higher and 
higher storeys of superior devotion and superior knowledge. So He is 
Kunda.(Para-bhakthi--A more intense devotion by which one entertains 
a great desire to realise the Brahman. परज्ञान  is the perfect 
vision of God, which one gets just for a moment and which is the 
cause for the still greater devotion To Him."
	Or 'kum' is an irregularly formed word ending with the nasal 
'm' which means sin. भगवान्  is called कुन्दर, because He destroys
 the sin. (Kum+दारयति ). Again He is Kunda since He cleanses the 
sin which has been taken out. The affix 'da' in the word 'Kunda' is 
derived from the root 'daip' (to cleanse).
	"The affix 'a' comes after a verbal root ending in long 'आ' 
when there is no preposition preceding it and when the obejct is in 
composition with it."
*816
 पर्जन्यः  The rain-cloud.
	He is Parjanyah (the Rain-Cloud) since, He removes the three kinds 
of heat (namely pain or suffering). (The three kinds of pain are-pain 
caused by mind (आध्यात्मिक ), that caused by fate or gods (आदि-दैविक ) 
and that caused by animal. (आँदि भौतिक ).)
	The word 'Parjanya' is derived from the root 'aj' (to dispel) and 
has the affix 'anya' added in the end. The word is irregularly formed.
*817
 पावनः He who goes. 
	भगवान्  Himself goes to His devotees in order to remove their 
distress. So He is पावन  :
	'पावन ' is derived from the root 'पावि ' which means to go.
*818
अनिलः  He who is not goaded by any one. 
	He needs no one to goad Him into the act of blessing His devotees 
thus. Vide :
	"When meditated upon भगवान्  मधुसूदन  grants His blessings 
even when one does not pray for them."
	Anilah is derived from the root 'ila' (to urge). 'ila' is that 
person who urges another to do an act. भगवान्  is 'Anila' (without an 
inducer) since there is no one to induce Him to save His devotees; for 
He does it by Himself. 
	"After a verb ending in a consonant, but preceded by 'I' 'u' or 
'ri' long or short, and after the verbs 'ज्ञ', 'प्री ' and 'क्री', comes 
the affix 'ka' (a).
*819
 अमृताशः He who feeds with nectar. 
	He feeds His devotees with the Nectar viz.  His auspicious 
qualities.
*820
 अमृतवपुः He of a nectar-like body. 
	भगवान्  has a body, which also is sweet like Nectar.
*821
 सर्वज्ञः The All-knower.
	He knows what lies and what does not lie in the power of His 
devotees as well as what they can accomplish and what they cannot.
*822
 सर्वतोमुखः He forwhom there are ways of approache from all sides
	He has not laid down any rule that He can be easily attained 
only by a particular means and not by any other. On the other hand 
He is so accessible that He can be easily attained by some means 
however trifling it may be. Vide :
	"If a peson seeks refuge with a desire for immediate help 
(i.e. aarta) or with endurance of delay (i.e. drptha) (he should 
be protected by those who know the शास्त्रा-s even though the person 
who comes is his enemy).
*823
 सुलभः He who can be easily attained. 
	Even though He is priceless, it is possible to buy Him with the 
semblance of a price. By way of illustration there is a story of 
a woman of multi-defaced body who offerred sandalpaste to श्री  
कृष्ण  and got Him.
	"she seized गोविन्द by His dress and said 'Come to my House."
*824
 सुव्रतः He of good vow. 
	He is Suvratha, because He takes a strong vow to protet those 
who come to Him by some means or other.
	"To him who has sought my protection only once (and begged of 
me saying 'I am Thine', to him I give protection from all beings.
*825
 सिद्धः He who is attained. 
	He is attained by those without any effort who have the 
correct knowledge of His true nature. This quality of protecting 
His devotees is not conditioned by anything, but it is always 
natural to Him and it is ever existent in Him.
*826
 शत्रुजित् शत्रुतापनः .
	He chastises the enemies of the world through Kakuthsttha, 
Purukuthsa and others by infusing His own divine prowess into them. 
Vide the fourth Amsa of वैष्णव (i.e. विष्णु पुराण );
	"In the fight between the gods and the demons. King Puranjaya 
sat on the hump of the bull (which form Indra had taken), and being 
infused with the power of भगवान् अच्युत   who was very angry with 
the असुरा-s He killed all the असुरा-s "
	(Allusion : Mythology relates that, when, in their war with the 
demons, the gods were often worsted, they, headed by Indra, went 
to the powerful Puranjaya, and requested him to help them in battle. 
The latter consented to do so provided Indra carried him on his shoulders. 
Indra accordingly assumed the form of a bull and Puranjaya seated on 
its hump, completely vanquished the demons (endowed as he was with the 
prowess of भगवान् ).
	The same is mentioned in the episode of Purukuthsa also.
	"King Puru-kuthsa went to the Nether-world, रसातल  by name, 
and being filled with the prowess of  भगवान् , killed all the गन्धर्वा-s
(who were giving trouble to the नागा-s (serpents) there."
*827
 न्यग्रोधोदुम्बरः 
He  Who is controlled by those who stand below bowing to Him and Who is 
the master of the superior Transcendental World.
	भगवान्  is न्यग्रोध  and also उदुम्बर . Therefore He is 
न्यग्रोधोदुम्बरः . He is न्यग्रोध , because He is prevented from 
going elsewhere by those who stand below praying for a favourable 
glance of His. Vide --
	"Anjali-the act of joining the hands in supplication is a 
great symbol which pleases the Lord at once without delay."
	(In the same lines is the advice of Hanuman to सुग्रीव )-- 
"(O सुग्रीव !) Since an offence has been committed by you I see no 
other atonement for you than to pacify लक्षमण and beg his pardon 
with folded hands."
	He is उदुम्बर ; that is He has Ambara (the Supreme abode which 
rises far above all other things by its magnificent qualities (ut)--
the Supreme Abode which includes within itself लक्षमी , attendants etc. 
So the name न्यग्रोधोदुम्बर  signfies that though He is worshipped by 
the highest of personages, He is within the easy reach of the lowest, 
(because it is possible to please Him easily)". This is clearly seen 
in the texts like श्री वैष्णव  where it is said :
	"भगवान्  पुरुषोत्तम , Who is the आदि-पुरुष , was requested 
by the serpents to help them from the trouble given by the गन्धर्व-s, 
मौनेया-s, by name."
	(मौनेया-s --This is the metronymic name of चित्रसेन  and other 
गन्धर्वा-s who were the sons of Muni, the wife of the sage Kasyapa.)
	The word Udumbara has been irregularly formed under the 
प्रषोदरादि  rule. The word Udumbara is a compound word from the two 
words 'ud'+'ambara'. Normally it should be उदुम्बर . But the first 
letter 'a' of the word 'ambara' has been changed into 'u' and 
therefore it comes under the प्रषोदरादि  rule.
	Then begins the topic of the rule of the world by भगवान्  
through the different gods who are like His limbs. In this state 
He is known by the name of 'प्रादुर्भावान्तर '.
*828
 अश्वत्थः  He who stands as the controller of the worlds through gods
who are transitory.
	He Who stands as the controller of the worlds through 
(Indra and other) gods who are transitory.
	The name Asvathtthah is derived as follows : He stands as 
the ruler of Indra and others who occupy posts that are temporary. 
They are not permanent because they ar in existence on one day and 
the next day they perish. (a-sva-ntho in the morrow). The formation 
of this word also comes under the पृषोदरादि   rule.
	Vide in the वैष्णव  : "Residing within the body of Brahma, 
composed of रजोगुण , भगवान्  creates the world. He takes the body 
of विष्णु  composed of Saththva, and protects the world. Assuming the 
body of काल  (Siva) composed of तमो गुण , He swallows the Universe."
*829
 चाणूरान्ध्रनिषूदनः He who slew the wrestler Chanoora by name.
	He killed the Asura-andhra wrestler चाणूर  by name who was the 
enemy of Indra and others.
	'Niढu:dana' is derived from the root 'su:d' (to kill)with 
the preposition 'ni'. (ni+सूद ). 'The 's' of 'सूद' is changed to 
'ष' like words 'सुषम  etc."
	चाणूरान्ध्र -a man of low caste चाणुर  by name.
*830
 सहस्रार्चिः The Thousand rayed. 
	भगवान्  is Sahasra-archih since He is the presiding Lord Who 
bestowed thousands of beneficent rays on the Sun god which (rays) 
have the qualities of ripening, drying, and illuminating, Vide in 
श्री पौष्का 
	"Know that the Sun and the Moon are the two eye-gods in an 
embodied form of the Supreme Deity परमात्म  whose name is 
अग्नीषोमात्म "
	"That light which, being in the Sun, illuminates the 
entire Universe, that in the Moon and that in the fire,--
understand all that light is only mine."
*831
 सप्तजिह्वः The Seven-tongued.
	The seven tongues of the fire, काले , कराले  etc. are His and 
they have been allotted the duties of nourishing the gods, receving 
the oblations and carrying them (to the respective gods). Vide in 
Pauढkara :
	"The Supreme Lord in the form of Hutha-bhuk (i.e. fire) carries 
to the gods who have fire as their mouth, the offerings which are 
sanctified by the मन्त्रा -s and made in a sacrifice along with 
clarified butter and thereby always pleases the entire world of 
the Brahmic egg."
	(The seven tongues of the fire-काले ,कराले ,मनोजवा , सुलोहिता, 
सुधूम्र-वर्णा ,स्फुलिङगिनी , and वीश्वरूपी .
	Agni-भगवान् is said to have seven flames whose names are 
हिरण्या , कनका ,रक्ता, कृष्णा, सुप्रभा ,अतिरक्ता  and भहुरूप.)
*832
 सप्तैधाः He who shines like fire with the seven kinds of fuel
	भगवान्  is the object of worship of all pious deeds for which the 
पाक -यज्ञ , हविर्-यज्ञ  and सोमा -समस्ता , each one of which is seven in
 number, act as fuel for fire. Doing sacrifices and digging wells also 
are for His worship. He is again worshipped by the sacrifices in which 
the sticks of seven kinds of trees are used for kindling the fire.
पाक यज्ञ -औपासन  , वैस्वदेव , स्ताले-पाक , अष्टका-श्राद्धा, 
monthly ceremonies,ईसान and Sarpa-bali.
	Havir-yajna-Agni-hओthra, Darsa-pओrna-मासा , Pindapithr-yajna, 
Pasu-bandha,आग्रयान, चतुर्मास्य  and सौत्रामणी .
Sओma-samstha-Agni-ष्टोम , Athyagni-ष्टोम , Ukthya, षोदश , 
वाज्पेय, अतिरात्र  and अप्तोर-याम .
	The sticks of seven forest trees that bear fruit apparently without any blossoms 
are used in sacrifices. Those trees are : the palasa tree, the baniyan tree, the 
fig tree, the jack tree,सामी , Asani-natha and पुष्कर-पर्ण .)
*833
 सप्तवाहनः  He who has seven vehicles.
	भहवान्  has seven vehicles in the form of the horses or the 
Sun's chariot which are the presiding deities of the वेदिc मन्त्राs 
that reveal Him and that are couched in the seven Metres गायत्री i etc. 
The वेदाs declare :
	"The seven vital airs are born of Him."
	"The seven are placed by परमात्मा who lies in the inner cave."
	Or (the name may be interpreted as follows): He Who controls the 
seven regions of air. Vide in पौष्कर  :
	"वायु  is the name of the presiding deity which gets its strength 
from the life-breath of the Lord of the World and it carries on the work 
of the Universe in different regions or strata. All these are like parks 
for the universal Lord in the three worlds." (Here the seven vital airs 
are the five sensory organs, mind and intellect.)
	(The seven regions of air are आवाह ,प्रवाह ,सम्वाह , उद्वाह , विवाह , 
परिवाह , and प्रवाह ).
	Seven Vedic Metres गायत्री , उष्णिक , अनुष्टुप् ,बृहती , पंङ्कती ,
 तृष्टुप् ,जगती .
*834
 अमूर्तिः He Who has not the form of others. 
	The name Amu:rthih signifies that His form is quite different 
from the gross bodies of others which are composed of the five elements.
*835
 अनघोः The Sinless. 
	He is not subject to Karma and so He is entirely different from 
the जीवा-s who are under its control.
*836
 अचिन्त्यः He  who surpasses all thought. 
	He cannot be described by comparing Him even with the Mukthँs.
*837
 भयकृद् He who cause fear.
*838
 भयनाशनः  He who dispels fear. 
	भगवान्  is the source of fear ( भयकृद् ) in the case of 
those who transgress His commands, and destroys the fear (भय-नाशन ) 
of those who obey them.
"कृष्ण  is the cause of fear as well as its remover."
*839
 अणुः The Atom 
	He is an Atom (अणु ) since He has the capacity to enter into the 
infinitesimally small void space known as 'दहर आका' in the heart 
of beings, into Avyaktha (i.e. Prakruthi), and also into the subtle जीवा . 
अणु  here means that he is extremely subtle.
	The word 'anu' derived from the verb 'anathi' which means 'goes'.
 After the root 'an' comes the affix 'u'.
	"He is a much smaller atom than the atom itself."
	"He is powerful and is more subtle than the fibre of the lotus stalk".
*840
 र्बृहत्  The great. 
	The extent of His pervasion is such that even the vast Transcendental 
World (Parama-pada) appears to be just in a corner of His body which 
surpasses that of cotton, wind etc., His movement is unimpeded on all 
sides. So He is Krusa. From the context it must be taken that the 
thinness here signifies lightness. Vide :
	"He pervaded the Earth in all its entirety and stood up beyond 
it by 'Dasa-angula." (Though the word Dasa-angula means ten inches' 
here 'dasa' means endless and 'angula' means yojana).
	"He is greater than the great."
	"He is greater than the Earth."
	"The words 'prahath', 'brhath 'manath and 'jagath' are formed 
by the affix 'athi' and it is like the 'sathr' affix. The force of 
the affix is to denote the present tense like the 'sathr' affix." 
So the root 'brh' has the affix 'ari' and the rule is that it denotes 
present tense.
*841
 कृशः He who is thin. 
	Because of the lightness of His body which surpasses that of cotton, 
wind etc. His movement is unimpeded on all sides. So He is Krisa. From 
the context it must be taken that the thinness here signifies lightness. 
Vide :
	"Inscrutable is भागा , He cannot be ordered by any one. He can go 
wherever He chooses."
	'Krusa' is derived from the root 'krs' (to spread or extend). The 
affix 'ka' has been added under the rule. "After a verb ending in a 
consonant, but preceded by 'I' 'u' or 'ri' (long or short), comes the 
affix 'ka' (a)."
*842
 स्थूलः He who is immense. 
	He has the ability to touch all things directly Himself remaining 
in one place. Standing on the earth, He can also touch the Moon, He is 
endowed with such superior power. So He is स्थूलः .
*843
 गुणभृत् The supporter of all that are subject to him. 
	He makes all things in all their states subject to Him by His mere, 
will and supports them. So he is गुणा-भ्रुता  This is His supreme power 
of ruling over all.
	"He keeps all under control and rules over them all."
*844
 निर्गुणः He who is bereft of the qualities of others.
	Even though He is in contact with all, He is not tainted by their 
defects since He is not subject to any one and is above all of them. 
He is extremely independent. This is His supreme power of holding others 
in magical submission to His will.
	"He bewitches the entire world with its wide-open eyes."
	"Saththa and other qualities that are in the Prakruthi have no 
place in भगवान् , the ruler."
*845
 महान् The great. 
	He is महान् , great. he has the superior power of achieving whatever 
He desires to have. (This is the power known as' प्राकाम्य); there is 
nothing that can obstruct what he desires to do. Even into the earth 
He can plunge and emerge out of it as one does in water. This power 
He has to the highest extent and so He is महान् . Vide :
	"The powerful Lord, Sauri, acts as He chooses. He unites and 
separates things as He likes. Whatever He chooses to do, He an accompliढ 
it without any effort."
	"The words 'पृषत् ' (sprinkle), 'बृहत् ' (to increase), 'महत् ' 
(to wroship) and 'jagath' (to go) are formed by the affix 'athi' which 
denotes the present tense as the 'satr' suffix does.
*846
 अधृतः The Uncontrolled.
	It is said that the fulfilment of one's desires is achieved in 
four ways : (1) Controlling the mind of another by entering the shadow 
of another (2) Subjecting the mind of another by constant meditation 
(3) entering into the body of another when he is alive or even after 
his death and (4) directing the conduct of sacrifices and digging of 
wells and tanks. भगवान् is called Adhrutha, because He has such 
omnipotence and omnipresence that He is not 'dhrutha' or impeded in 
His actions. All this superior power is quite natural to Him based on 
His own free will. This is seen in the case of श्री कृष्ण. "Therefore 
it is said about Him. By His mere will the sons of the Vaidika-Brahmin 
were able to reach the Paramapada (the Transcendental World) from which 
there is nromally no return even though they had not attained 
perfection in meditation; and they came back because of His will 
to bring them back to the world of rebirth. Again though He has the 
power to change the nature of the sentient  जीवात्मा  and the non-sentient 
Prakruthi, for some inscrutable reason He does not bring about 
such a change.
*847
 स्वधृतः He whose sovereignty is innate.
	The name स्वधृतः  distinguishes the sublime nature of परमात्मा  
from the greatness of the bound souls which is acquired by them by means
 of incantations, herbs, austerities and meditation. This sublimity of 
the परमात्मा is not dependent on meditation etc., but it is natural to 
Him. So He is Sva-dhruthah.
*848
 स्वास्यः He  who has a glorious status.
	The status and glory of भगवान्  is distinguished here from that of 
the मुक्ता-s (or Released souls). 'आस्य ' means status. भगवान्'s 
status is always magnificent. In the case of the Muktha, his stately 
nature, though innate to him, was clouded once by Nescience and it 
has become manifest only after release from संसार . It is not so with 
भगवान्  since it is always manifest.
	"Also after a verb ending in long 'आ', when there is a preposition 
along with it, the affix 'ang' comes (when the noun formed is in feminine 
gender)."
*849
 प्राग्वंशः He who is the cause of the eternally free souls.
	The name  प्राग्वंशः  distinguishes Him from the eternally free souls 
(the नित्याs) by virtue of His glory.
	"Parama-pada is the place of विष्णु  where from time immemorial the 
साध्य-देवाs (i.e. eternally free angels) live."
	As stated in this Sruthi text, the word 'प्राग् ' signifies the 
eternally free souls. He is their 'vamsa'--the cause for their superior 
status. If their essential nature and their glory is eternally manifest, 
it is due to Him. It is undisputed and accepted by all that all things in 
all ways depend on His will. All this (that has been delineated in 
the four names (846 to 849) is summarised by the following sloka 
in the वैष्णव  (पुराण ) thus:
	"O Lord! In this way Thy glory is superior, inborn and unexcelled. 
Therefore how can I fully describe it and praise Thee?"
*850
 वंशवर्धनः He who keeps His progeny growing. 
	He is Vamsa-vardhana since He is the cause for keeping in tact 
the respective essential nature of all beings that are different from Him. 
Here the 'Vamsa' or the race signifies the hosts of eternally free Angels
and the सिद्धा-s who are like His pedigree and who have been mentioned just 
previously. He goes on increasing them. Vide :
	"I prostrate before the Lord Who keeps His followers ever around Him."
*851
 भारभृत् he who shoulders the burden. 
	In the case of the मुकेता-s (or Released souls) also, He bears the 
burden of bringing about their release from the bondage of the world, 
the manifestation of their essential nature and the attainment  to Himself.
*852
 कथितः He who has been revealed as such. 
	The authority for this quality of His is shown by the name Katthithah.
 It is stated in all शास्त्रा-s that He is possessed of all the qualities 
described above and also about to be described hereafter.
"In the वेदाs, the पुरुषs , the अङ्गाs and the subsidiary अङ्गा-s Thy 
greatness is sung."
	"O the foremost amongst the descendents of बारता ! विष्णु  is 
praised everywhere--in the वेदाs, in the रामायण  and in the sared 
महाभारत  in the beginning, the middle as well as in the end".
	"He is the superior object that is denoted by all words."
*853
 योगी He Who is endowed with super-human powers. 
	The name योगी signifies that all that has been stated about 
Him is quite possible in Him. There is a unique greatness in Him 
of bring about a harmonious combination of things that generally 
do not go together. Such greatness is in an extreme measure and 
is quite natural to Him. So the scriptural texts declare :
	"Look at the great योग of Mine Who am the Lord."
	"कृष्ण , the Lord of योग ."
	"योग  that has sprung from कृष्ण , the Lord of योग."
	"Hari, that Supreme Lord of योग ." And so on.
*854
 योगीशः He who is the foremost Lord of all yogins..
	He bears the burden of bringing about the perfection of the योगा  
even in the case of Sanaka and other योगिन्s who are possessed of powers 
of meditation natural to them even though they are in the midst of souls 
in bondage.
	"He conferred the highly pure goal, namely Vaikuntta, upon Sanaka 
and other sages wo were flawless.
*855
 सर्वकामदः The bestower of all desires. 
	Even to those whose practice of योगा  has been adversely affected. 
He grants their desires and bestows the power of अणिमा  etc., though it 
is an impediment in the path of Salvation. Vide :
	"They reach the worlds of those who have done meritorious deeds and 
live there for a long number of years."
*856
 आश्रमः He who provides an abode for rest for them. 
	When they return from the meritorious worlds, He makes them take 
birth in the houses iof श्री वैष्णवा-s where real knowledge of the Lord 
can be had in profusion and they can become refreshed.
	"He who has swerved from the path of योगा  he had begun, is born 
again in the abode of pure and pious devotees."
*857
 श्रमणः He who makes them continue their Yoga.
	In the case of those whose latent impressions of the योगा  they had 
begun had not been exhausted either by the enjoyment of the fruits of 
their Karma or by their births. भगवान्  helps them to resume their 
योगिc practice without much effort.
	"There (in his new birth) the योगी  gains the knowledge of the 
योगा  that he had been practising in the previous birth."
	"For 'yu' and 'vu' nasalised in an affix 'Iyu'--'nvul' are 
substituted respectively 'an' and 'ak'." (sram+Iyu=sram+an=श्रमणः).
*858
 क्षामः He who helps the Yogi to become well-equipped. 
	Even those, who have fallen from the practice of योगा , are blessed 
with strength to cross the unfordable ocean of संसार  if they show 
but an inclination to resume the योगा  that they have discontinued.
	"Dear Arjuna! He who begins to do a good thing never goes to 
damnation."
	"The affix 'ghajn' comes after the root 'kढam' (to be capable of)."
*859
 सुपर्णः  He who helps ( the Yogins) to cross the ocean of
       Samsara). 
	When once they begin to resume the योगा (left incomplete in their 
previous birth). He helps them to complete the योगा  and reach the shore 
beyond the region of darkness.
	The मौलाs say : "The Lord leads them to reach the shore."
	"He attains perfection in योगा  by practising it in several births 
and reaches the Supreme Abode."
*860
 वायुवाहनः He Who lifts up by swift wind like Garuda. 
	वायु  here is used to signify Garuda, the lord of birds, who is noted 
for his swiftness of movement. With the help of Garuda, भगवान्  lifts up 
those who have fallen down because of very powerful causes and makes them 
reach the other sore. So He is called वायु-वाहनः . By way of illustration
 we have the story of King Uparichara-वासु . वासु  was a very great devotee 
of भगवान् n. Due to the curse of a great sage he was wandering in the 
nether worlds.  भगवान्  rescued him by means of Garuda and again made 
him move about in upper worlds Vide in the विष्णु तत्व  :
	"Or the Garuda, the king of birds, will come to him quickly and 
carry him to the abode of  भगवान्  (the master of Garuda)."
*861
 धनुर्धरः  The wielder of the bow. 
	In order to remove the thorns in the path of His devotees performing 
योगा  in this manner,  भगवान्  is Himself wielding His bow, सारंग .
"It is for this reason that the bow is wielded by the क्षत्रिया-s 
in this world."
"The bow is always carried by the क्षत्रिया-s  so that there may 
not be the cry of distress anywhere."
*862
 धनुर्वेदः The propounder of the Science of Archery. 
	Even those like the ruler of the gods and those of men acquire 
a knowledge of archery and other things from Him Who is the propounder 
of all such शास्त्रा s.
*863
 दण्डः 
	The source of punishment (for the wicked) wicked as per the rules 
of laws and bring happiness to the world by following the rules of dharma 
as laid down by the वेदा-s.
	"The affix 'da' comes after a verb ending in a nasa!" 'दण्ड ' is 
derived from 'dam' (to subdue). (dam+da=दण्ड ).
*864
 दमयिता The Subduer. 
	He as राम  directly was in the habit of putting down wicked 
persons like रावण  and others.
*865
 अदमः He who is not subdues by any one.
	There is not one who can subdue Him like this -- Adamah. Vide :
"जनार्दन  by his mere will can turn into ashes the entire Universe. 
But all the Universe combined together can do no harm to Him."
*866
 अपराजितः The invincible. 
	While the power of भगवान्  to rule over others is all 
comprehensive, his actions cannot be obstructed by any one at any 
time anywhere or by any means. Vide :
	"कृष्ण  Who is invincible."
	"What is there in this world that cannot be conquered by 
that person who has भगवान् Hari as his mentor, protector and friend?"
*867
 सर्वसहः He Who supports all. 
	He bears all other gods who are, by His command, the objects 
of worship for those who are not fully equipped. So He is Sarva-sahah.
*868
 नियन्ता He who diercts. 
	He directs and controls the tastes of others in the worship of 
their respective deities.
	"Whichever devotee desires to worhsip with faith whichever form 
of Mine,-(in relation to such devotee, I make that same faith of his 
unढakable and firm)".
*869
 नियमः He who ordains.
	"In accordance with His faith a person attempts to worship 
that manifestation; and thence he obtains the objects of his desire. 
They are in fact bestowed by Me alone."
	"And the affix 'ap', comes optionally after the verb 'yam' 
(to control) when the preposition 'sam', 'upa', 'ni', and 'vi' are 
in composition or even when it is preposition-less.
*870
 यमः The controller. 
	It is He that controls others also like Yama who are the bestowers 
of the respective fruits. Vide :
	"विष्णु  has got the power to control me also"--says Yama.
	Thus far the Lord has been delineated as presiding over the two 
qualities of रजस्  and तमस्  predominant in the worshippers.
*871
 सत्त्ववान् He  Who has the quality of Sattva (under his control)
	He presides directly over the Saththva-गुण  which has the qualities 
of lustre, lightness and bliss and which therefore is the cause of 
Salvation. Vide :
	"The Great Lord is the supreme Person Who guides the flow or 
the movement of Saththva-गुण ."
	The qualities of रजस्  and तमस्  are being manipulated by Him 
through me medium of Brahma and Siva respectively. The Lord says in 
the वराह पुराण  :
	"A being is released from bondage because of the quality of 
Saththva in him. Saththva is indeed नारायण  Himself If a person has 
the quality of रजस्  coupled with सत्तव , he becomes a man of wealth 
and great fame."
	"It is declared in all the शास्त्रा s that it is the nature of Brahma 
when रजास्  becomes associated with तमस् . In fact He is also Myself 
(i.e. He is controlled by Me). There is no doubt about it."
*872
 सात्विकः He that has Sattva-guna.
	It is quite fitting to associate the सत्व गुण  with भगवान्  
because it is He that dispenses the fruits of dharma, knowledge, 
non-attachment and riches.
	"The affix 'thak' comes with a verb in the sense of 'who 
deserves that."
*873
 सत्यः The truth. 
	Since, He is delineated by the सात्विक शास्त्रास् , all the greatness 
attributed to Him is true and so He is Sathya.
	"कृष्णा  is rooted in  सत्यः and  सत्यः  is rooted in कृष्णा . 
Existence and non-existence (saththa and asaththa) are grounded on 
गोविन्द . So great men opine that कृष्णा  is Truth itself."
*874
 सत्यधर्मपरायणः  He who is pleased with the true Dharma.
	The noble Dharma (viz. Nivruththi-dharma) which is practised by 
pious men with no ulterior motive is said to please Him most. They 
follow that Dharma because it has been laid down in the सात्विक शास्त्रास् 
*875
 अभिप्रायः He who is the object of choice. 
	He is the highest goal sought after by His devotees who are 
pure by nature, practise the सात्विक धर्म , and are not hankering 
after other low pleasures.
*876
 प्रियार्हः He who is rightly the object of love. 
	He is rightly qualified to bless the devotee who meditates on Him 
and for whom He is the highest goal. भगवान्  is naturally attached to 
those who are exclusively devoted to Him; If He is generous towards those 
who resort to Him for getting back the lost wealth or for the 
realisation of their own आत्मा , it is only because of His managanimity 
and generosity.
	"Of all those who are devoted to me, ज्ञानी (the man of knowledge) 
is really the best because of his exclusive devotion to Me and of his 
desire to be associated with Me always."
	"All these (four kinds of devotees) are really generous (because 
they come to Me for fulfilling the desires).
*877
 अर्हः  The fitting person.
	He is the right Deity to be sought after by His devotees who have 
no desire for anything other (than Him).
	"He Who is attached to Me and has his mind fixed on Me attains 
Me, the supreme goal."
*878
 प्रियकृत् He who does what is wanted by others. 
	Even though some people are attached to other things if they worship 
Him, He grants their desires and makes them His devotees.
	Even though the minds of some people are drawn towards worldly 
things, if they once come to Me to worship Me) "I make them take a 
liking for the practice of Karma without having an eye on its fruit."
*879
 प्रीतिवर्धनः He Who enhances their joy.
	 Again by manifesting His qualities more and more, He increases 
the joy of His devotees.
	"On those who meditate on Me, with love, I confer that knowledge 
of योगा  (by which they attain Me)."
*880
 विहायसगतिः He Who is the means for the attainment of the Paramapada
	It is because of Him that those who have reached the highest stage 
of Bhakthi, attain the supreme abode (परमपद ). So He Himself has said :
	"Having enjoyed great pleasures in abundance, through My grace, you 
will remember Me at the last moment and will begin to live in my world."
	The Brahma सूत्र  says : "Because of the efficacy of Bhakthi योग  
that has been practised by a devotee and because of the constant meditation 
on the path which leads to Paramapada, there springs a lustre at the tip 
of the heart which is the seat of the आत्म . Through the grace of the 
Lord residing in his heart the उपासका  is able to see the opening by 
which he has to go; he then leaves the body through that particular 
nerve called सुषुम्न  which will lead him to the path of the supreme 
abode and which is different from the other one hundred nerves that 
will lead a person to places other than the superior abode."
*881
 र्ज्योतिः The Light. This is the first step in the Supreme Abode. 
	This is the first step in the Supreme Abode. This is called Jyothi 
because things are illuminated by it.
	"They reach Archih (the domain of Light)".
	(The words 'Archih' and Jyotih' are synonyms.) Archih and other 
deities are known as 'आतिवाहिका-s' (Escorting Angels), because they 
have pleased the Lord and earned His grace by their उपासना  or Meditation).
	This topic has been discussed in the following Brahma सूत्रा-s :
	"The मुक्ताs (Released Souls) are led along the stages beginning 
with Archi (Light), and this is well-known in the उपनिषद्c Texts."
	"Archih and other deities are known as आतिवाहिका-s (Escorting Angels) 
because of the nature of their duty which is to lead the मुक्ता-s to the 
Supreme Abode."
	(There are twelve such Escorting Angels and Archih is the first. 
The others are : 2. Ahas (day); 3. Sukla-पक्ष  (the bright fortnight); 4. 
उत्तरायण  (Summer solstice); 5. Samvathsara (Year); 6. वायु  (Wind); 7.
 Su:rya (Sun); 8. Chandra (Moon); 9. Vidyuth (Lightning); 0. 
वरुण  (Lord of the ocean); 11. Indra (Lord of gods); and 12. 
Brahma (the Creator); Names 881 to 889 are said to signify the 
twelve Escorting Angels who are presided over by भगवान् .)
*882
 सुरुचिः He of lovely effulgence. 
	The day is effulgent because of the Sun-rise. भगवान्  is 
Suruchi since, He is endowed with that lovely effulgence.
	"From the Light to the Day" is the Sruthi.
	(The deity presiding over Day is the next escort appointed 
by the Lord for the Muktha. This is the second step in the path 
beginning with Archi.)
	"After a verb ending in a consonant, but preceded by 
'I', 'u', 'r' (long or short), comes the  affix 'kith'". The 
affix 'in has been added to the verb to denote the sense of 
the Nominative case. There is the 'kith' affix also.
*883
 हुतभुग्विभुः He that is the light fortnight. 
	(This is one name. Here Hutha-bhuk signifies the Moon who 
consumes (bhuk) what is offered in the fire (hutha) after turning 
it into nectar.
	भगवन्  is that half of the month in which the moon waxes 
into full moon i.e. the light fortnight consuming the sacrifical 
offering which turn into nectar. (This is the third step in the 
Archir-आदि  path-the Path beginning with Archi.)
	"From the Day to the growing Fortnight (Sukla-पक्ष ).
*884
 रविः He who is praised by virtue of His being the Summer solstice.
	उत्तरायण  is the period in which the Sun begins his movement 
towards the North. भगवान्  is called Ravi by virtue of His being 
praised (रूयते ) thus (This is the fourth step in the आर्चिरादिमार्ग .)
	"(They attain) from the bright fortnight the six months which 
belong to the northern progress of the Sun."
*885
 र्विरोचनः The Illuminant.
	भगवान्  is the year which illuminates the Sun when he rises his 
chariot through the two अयनाs (periods of six moths. i.e. उत्तरायण  
and दक्षिणायण  (the Summer solsticeand the winter solstice). (This is 
the fifth step).
	"From the months (they attain) the year."
	"This Sun is the Year."
*886
 सूर्यः The source of movement for the wind. 
	He is called सूर्य  since the Wind always moves out of Him.
	"The words "राज-सूर्य " 'सूय ' etc. Are irregularly formed 
by the addition of the affix 'क्यप् )." As the rule with reference 
to the 'krit' and Iyut' affixes has got wide application, and the 
meaning of the 'kruth' affix also is not restricted, we can interpret 
a word with the 'kruth' affix in a way suitable to the context. (
The word 'सूर्य ' is derived from 'sr' (to move) and is given the 
desired meaning.)
	"He (the जीव ) goes to the वायुलोक ."
	This is the sixth step in the Archirdi Path'
*887
 सविता He who produces (i.e. the sun)
	भगवान्  produces through the Sun as the medium rain crops etc. 
Therefore He is called Savitha (आदित्या ).
	"(The जीव ) goes from the Year to आदित्या ."
	"वायु  (has to come) after the year, because of general and 
particular terms to show it."
	It is pertinent to introduce वायु  between the Samvathsara and 
the आदित्या  since, there  are Upanishadic texts which declare that 
the जीवा  goes from the संवत्सर  (Year) to वायुलोक i.e. 'देव लोक'.
 So it must be taken that the जीव  goes from the संवत्सर  to वायु , 
and from there to the Sun. (who is the seventh step in the Path).
*888
 रविलोचनः He Who illuminates through the rays of the sun.
	भगवान्  is रविलोचन  since, He makes the Moon the Lightning 
and वरुण shine by means of the Sun's rays reflecting on them. These 
three are the eighth, ninth and tenth steps in the अर्चरादि पाठ .)
"(The जीवा  goes) from the आदित्या  to the Moon, and from the 
Moon to the Lightning."
	"Then He goes to वरुण लोक ."
*889
 अनन्तहुतभुग्भोक्ता he who is Indra and Brhama of immeasureable
 greatness.
	He Who is Indra and Brahma of immeasurable greatness.
	Indra is called 'Hutha-bhuk', because he consumes what is offered 
as an oblation in sacrifices in the fire. Brahma is called भोक्ता  
because He is the protector of the beings in the Universe. Both of 
them possessed of immense greatness are under His control. so भगवान्  
is Anantha-hutha bhuk-भोक्ता . Indra and Brahma work for the Lord in 
escorting the जीवा  in the Archiradi-Path. They are the eleventh and 
twelth steps which are the last in the Path.)
	"He (the released soul) comes to the Indra लोक ; and then he 
comes to the प्रजापति लोक  (i.e. the world of Brahma)."
*890
 सुखदः The giver of the bliss. 
	By the touch of अमानव  ( a celestial deity) the Lord dispels the 
contact with the world along with the latent impressions and confers 
Bliss on the जीवा  when the latter reaches Him. He is Sukhadah.
	"Then the Celestial पुरुष ,अमानव  by name comes and leads these 
freed souls to the Supreme Being."
*891
 नैकदः He Who is the lord of those who give many things. 
	They who give only one thing are 'एकदा-s'. Unlike these 'नैकदाs' 
are those who give not one, but many things. Here भगवान्  is called 
'Naikada' because He has many celestlals as His attendants who are 
well-versed in the art of giving reception to the मुक््ता-s and who 
bestow countless garlands, pigment, clothes, etc. on them.
	The कौष्ताकिन्s declare : "Five hundred अपसरा-s (divine
 damsals rush forth to receive the Muktha. A hundred of them have 
garlands in their hands, and another hundred have the pigment in 
their hands to decorate him" and so on.
	"They adorn him with the adornments of the Brahman itself."
*892
 अग्रजः He Who manifests Himself before the Muktas. 
	When the मुक्ताs reach Him, भगवान् , along with लक्षमी , 
the ruler of the Universe, manifests Himself to them and both of them 
become objects of enjoyment for them. This is delineated in the 
Paryanka-vidya (of कौषिताकि  Upanishad).
	The passage in the कौषिताकि  Upanishad begins with these words :
	"He (the Muktha) comes to the Couch (Paryanka) of great splendour." 
And proceeds : 'The Supreme Brahman is seated on it with लक्षमी  beside 
Him and the attendants around Him. The Muktha (Who has meditated upon 
the Lord in this manner) and who now realises Him, places his foot on 
the couch and climbs it. Brahman asks him, 'Who are you?"
	And the text concludes : "The knowledge that Brahman has, the 
Muktha acquires; and the Bliss that is Brahman's he enjoys that bliss."
*893
 अनिर्विण्णः He who is not despondent. 
	भगवान्  with great solicitude and mercy, lifts up His devotee from 
the girth of संसार  and makes him attain Him. Seeing that the Muktha 
is no longer an object of compassion, the Lord is free from despondency 
and sorrow, like राम .
	"(राम  crowned विभीषण  as the King of Lanka). Then राम  felt 
that He had carried out what He proposed to do and felt immensely happy, 
indeed!."
*894
 सदामर्षी He who is ever patient. 
	Thenceforward it is the habit of भगवान्  to help the Muktha in 
the fulfilment of his desire to do service to Him by way of return for 
what परमात्म  has done him. He also accepts with forbearance all the 
services that the Muktha does. So भगवान्  is सदामर्षी .
	The Sruthi also declares : "The Muktha enjoys all the desirable 
and fascinating qualities of Brahman as well as Brahman itself."
*895
 लोकाधिष्ठानम् The Support of the worlds.
	"In the best of worlds of unsurpassed excellence"--As stated in 
this Sruthi there are worlds which are enjoyed by the Muktha. Paramँthma 
is the eternal supporter of all those worlds.
*896
 अद्भुतः He who is extreamely wonderful. 
	And there He is wonderful. Even though He is enjoyed by all ways, 
still He is a source of wonder as if unseen before.
	"The affix 'duthach' comes after the root 'भू ' (to be) 
preceded by 'ath' (an indeclinable meaning 'sudden')."
*897
 सनात् The object of enjoyment. 
	भगवान्  confers perfect enjoyment of Bliss equally on all the 
	मुक्ता-s."Sanah' and 'सनात ' are listed in the गण-पाठ  as 
irregularly formed words."
*898
 सनातनतमः The most Ancient.
	In this way He is eternally so. His form is most ancient, 
(i.e. eternal). Even in the past He was new. (पुराण ) Despite the 
fact that extstence is eternal, He is always more enjoyable and fresh, 
as though He is new and not seen before.
*899
 कपिलः He who is effulgent.
	Of what form is He? His radiant form in the self-luminous 
Vaikuntta is very much like a blue cloud in the midst of sparkling 
streaks of lightenings.
*900
 कपिरव्ययः He who enjoys the never. Decreaseign bliss.
	He also experiences the pleasure of the enjoyment of His Bliss, 
or He keeps it safe (without destruction).
	"The affix 'in' comes after all roots." The long 'आ' of the 
root 'पा' (to protect or to drink) has been dropped. (Kam+पा=कपिः ).
