*401
 अनयः He Who cannot be spirited away. 
	भगवान्  is Anaya since He cannot be led away by those who are not 
	well-disposed towards Him.
	"रावण  who could lift with ease even the mountains, the हिमालया-s, 
	Mandara and Meru, as well as the three worlds with all the gods, 
	could not lift up in the battle-field even with both his hands the 
	younger brother of Bharatha (i.e. लक्षमण ). (The reference here is
	 to the efforts of रावण  to carry away लक्षमण  when the latter 
	had fallen down unconscious struck by the Sakthi weapon of रावण).
	Or 'Ayah' is the means which brings prosperity. 'Anayah' signifies 
	that there is no one else except भगवान्  who can bring prosperity 
	to the people of the world. Vide 
	"When He is there as our ruler and Protector, we have all our desires 
	fulfilled."
*402
 वीरः He who is the cause of terror. 
	भगवान्  is the source of fear and terror for the राक्षसा-s. So He 
	is called वीरः .	The word 'वीर ' is derived from the root 'Aja' 
	(to drive or lead). 'वी' is the substitute for 'Aja' when an 
	अर्ध-धातुक  affix follows with the exception of the two 
	affixes-'Ghajn' and 'Ap'. It also takes the affix 'Rak' under 
	the rule "The affix 'Rak' comes after 'Sphayi', 'Tanch', 'Chadi',
	'Aj' and other roots.	"When रावण , the king of the राक्षसा-s,
	even thought of the arrows of श्री राम , which had the lustre of 
	the club of Brahma and the glitter of the lightning he became uneasy."
	"The king (रावण ) was overpowered by the powerful राम  like the 
	elephant by the lion, and the serpent by Garuda."
	Thus did मारीच  say : "In every tree do I see श्री राम dressed 
	in the tree-dark and black deer-skin and with His bow drawn as 
	though He is the god of death with the ropes in hand." And other such
	texts also.
*403
 शक्तिमतां श्रेष्ठः The greatest among the powerful. He who 
	is the most praiseworthy amongst the powerful gods and others.
*404
 धर्म Virtue (incarnate). 
	भगवान्  is धर्म  since, He sustains all beings by conferring 
	prosperity and salvation on them.
	The affix 'man' has been added to the root 'Dhr' under the rule : 
	"The affix 'man' comes after the roots 'arti', sthu, su, nu, sri, 
	dhri, क्षि, क्षु, भा,या,वा, padi, यक्ष  and ni." सोम and other 
	words are formed by the same rule.
	Brahma, the best of those who know the Dharma, said the same to SrंRँma.
	"Thou art the Supreme Dharma in all the worlds."
	('On an oath before discharging the arrow against Indrajit, लक्षमण  
	said:)
	"If श्री रामा , the son of Dasarattha, is Dharma incarnate, is wedded 
	to truthfulness and is unparalleled in valour, then, O arrow! Kill 
	the son of रावण  (i.e. Indrajit)."
	And  many others also say so;
	"Those Brahmins, who are well-versed in the वेदा-s, and those people 
	who have realised the Brahman, declare in one voice that the great 
	श्री कृष्ण  is the eternal Dharma incarnate."
	"The sacred द्वारवती  is the place where (श्री कृष्ण ) the Slayer 
	of Madhu resides."
	"He is the ancient God Himself and also the eternal Dharma incarnate."
	Others have said : "Dharma along with Arttha (i.e. wealth) proceed 
	from श्री राम  Himself."
*405
 धर्मवित् उत्तमः The foremost among the Dharma-conscious.
	He is the best of those who have a knowledge of Dharma. Though श्री राम
	was their disciple, वसिष्ठ, वामदेव ,मार्कण्डेय  and other 
	sages resorted to Him for a knowledge of Dharma. Vide :
	"Like the ocean by the rivers, श्री राम was always resorted to by 
	good men with respect."
	"He was highly respected by those who were well-versed in the वेदा-s".
	"He rightly knew the वेदा-s and their अन्गा-s (auxiliaries)."
	"Thou art unknowable and invincible. Thou hast conquered the senses 
	and  art the embodiment of the best Dharma. Thou art clear-sighted 
	and endowed with undying reputation. Thou hast Earthlike forbearance 
	and blood-red eyes." (These are the words of Thara, the Monkey-Queen).
*406
 वैकुण्ठः Remover of obstacles of union.
	He brings about the union of all. The word वैकुण्ठः is derived from 
	the root 'kuti' which means obstructing the path. Here it signifies 
	the obstacles to the union. वैकुण्ठःs are those whose obstacles have 
	been removed. भगवान्  belongs to them and so He is called वैकुण्ठः. 
	Vide 
	"By me the Earth was united with water, ether with air and air with 
	fire. So I am called वैकुण्ठः ."
	Such a quality was seen in भगवान्  when He came as श्री राम .
	Vide 
	"The subjects of रामा's kingdom observed this quality in रामा and 
	remembering it they never caused mutual harm."
	When रामा  was not with them, they never relished each other's company.
	This can be seen in the words of the wives to their husbands.
	"Either go after श्री रामा or get away so that nothing will be heard 
	of you."
	"The elephants gave up eating their fodder and the cows would not 
	allow the calves to come and drink the milk from their udder."
	"The people were not happy when they got back their lost wealth, 
	nor were they pleased when new wealth came to them in large quantities.
	The mother felt no joy when she gave birth to a son for the first time."
	"Children yearning for mother's milk, the husbands of women and 
	brothersevery one of them abandoned the other and then began to go after Srं राम."
*407
 पुरुषः The Purifier.
	He is पुरुष , because He purifies all by nature and is devoid of 
	all sins. Vide :--
	"O the scion of the Raghus! Thou alone art the purifier of all the 
	worlds."
	Sabari said to राम  : "O gentle Sir that bestows honour! I have been 
	purified by Thy charming eyes."
	The word 'पुरुष' is derived from the root 'pri' (to protect or 
	nourish). Or the word 'पुरुष' is formed by the affix कुषन् ' to 
	the base 'purah'.
	That राम  alone is considered to be the 'पुरुष ' in every way.
	"These six गुणा (qualities) add to the lustre of श्री रामा; the 
	पुरुषोत्तम."
	"श्री रामा is the सारंग-bow-wielder; He is हृषीकेश  He is the पुरुष 
	and also the पुरुषोत्तम ."
*408
 प्राणः The vita air (life breath). He is the life breath of all.
	भगवान्  is प्राणा since, He is the life-breath of all.
*409
 प्राणदः The life giver. 
	भगवान्  is प्राणद since He bestows the well-known life itself to 
	all. It is because of this that in His separation.
	"Even the trees with their flowers, buds and sprouts withered."
	"All that remained in the forests and gardens were only dry leaves."
*410
 प्रणवः He Who makes others bow before Him.
	By virtue of His qualities He makes the sentient and the non-sentient 
	bow before Him. So He is प्रणवः . The वेदिc etymology reads 'He makes others bow.'
	"As श्री राम was possessed of charming qualities. He moved the hearts 
	of the people (when he set off for the forest)."
*411
 पृथुः Well known. Bhagavan is great by His extensive reputation.
	भगवान्  is great (Prutthu) by His extensive reputation.
	The word 'Prutthu' is derived from the root 'Prattha' (to be renowned).
	"The affix 'ku' is added to the roots 'pratthi', 'mradi', and 'bhrasj'
	, and there is the vocalisation of 'ra' into 'ri' and the elision of
	's' in 'bhrasj'.".
	"The son of the King Dasarattha is endowed with world-wide renown."
	"He was well-known as राम to all people."
	"Amongst them श्री राम was the most reputed."
	"He was the unique seat of all fame." And so on.
*412
 हिरण्यगर्भः He who was in the delightful hearts.
	By being the object of meditation even to those who were not 
	contemporaneous with the period of His incarnation, He was of great 
	help to them. So He is called हिरण्यगर्भः  . It also signifies that 
	as the auspicious object of their meditation. He remains concealed 
	in the loving and delightful hearts of those who contemplate on Him.
	Or it may be taken to signify that He is like a treasure of gold. Vide the Manthra on His meditation :
	"He alone is to be meditated upon as the Soul of the Universe."
*413
 शत्रुघ्नः The Enemy -slayer. He is called Satrughna, because 
	Bhagavan subdues by his arrows of wisdom the groups of sense which 
	are enemies like Ravana and which lead away people to the enjoyment 
	of the earthly pleasures.
	He is called Satrughna, because भगवान्  subdues by His arrows of 
	wisdom the groups of senses which are enemies like रावण  and which 
	lead away people to the enjoyment of the earthly pleasures.
	About meditation on Him it is stated :
	"He subdues the mind and the ten sense-organs of the योगिs with 
	the power of discrimination even as श्री राम  vanquished the frightful 
	ten-headed रावणा , the राक्षस  chief with hosts of arrows.
	(Note : The mind is compared to रावण  and the ten Indriyas to his 
	ten heads and the arrows that राम  used to kill him to discrimination.)
	"And the affix 'tak' comes after the verb 'han' (to kill) when 
	the object is in composition with it and when the word to be 
	formed denotes an agent other than a human being". (But the word 
	'Satrughna' is valid under the 'मूल विभुजादि ' class and is 
	formed by affix 'ka'.)
	"The root-vowel of 'gam', 'han' etc. is elided before an affix 
	beginning with a vowel when it has an idnicatory 'k' or 'gn'.
	"A guttural is substituted for the 'h' in 'han' before an affix 
	having an indicatory 'jn' or 'n' and before 'n'.
*414
 व्याप्तः He Who is full (of love and affection).
	His affection towards innocent children and aged persons, master 
	and servant, friends and foestowards all, 'it is uniform and there 
	is no difference. So He is 'व्याप्तः '. Vide :
	'राम makes full and kind enquiries of all His subjects as 
	though they are His kinsfold in their respective order 
	regarding their sons, sacrificial fires, wives, servants and 
	disciples even as a father would of his own sons."
	"Even towards His enemies राम is kind." And so on.
*415
 वायुः  He who moves towards his devotees.
	He is called 'वायु ', because He Himself goes seeking His devotees 
	wherever they may be. Vide :
	"श्री राम of great valour and the destroyer of enemies, Himself 
	went to the abode of Sabari (the hunter-woman) with respect seeking her."
	"राम  went to the hermitage of भरद्वाज ."
	"राम  of virtuous nature approached Guha, (the chieftain of the 
	hunters)."
	"The affix 'un' comes after the roots 'kri', 'वा', 'पा', 'जा' and 'mi'." (वा +u=वायु ).
*416
 अधोक्षजः He who does not get diminished. 
	भगवान्  is like a sea of nectar and even though He is enjoyed by 
	all and at all times, He is अधोक्षजः (i.e. never gets diminished).
	"Since, He never gets lessened, He is called अधोक्षजः."
	"I know Thee as being imperishable Who art the slayer of Madhu 
	(Asura) and the Lord of all gods."
	"Thy fame never gets lessened." And so on.
*417
 ऋतुः   He who moves towards. 
	He gets into the hearts of all by virtue of the successive waves of 
	His qualities which are unique and highly delightful. He gets into 
	(the hearts of) all ऋतुः  . It is because of such a quality the 
	seasons like Vasantha and Sisira get the name of 'ruthu'. 
	(Vasantha=Spring; Sisira = Cool season.) Vide :=--
 	The word 'rithu' is derived from the root 'ru' (to go) by the 
	rule "The affix 'thu' comes after the root 'ri'."
*418
 सुदर्शनः - He of a delightful appearance. 
	The very sight of Him is a source of delight and auspiciousness 
	even to those who may be ignorant of His qualities and greatness. 
	Vide :
	"Like the Moon, राम  had a delightful form."
	"Ever delightful was the sight of राम ."
*419
 कालः  He who draws all towards himself. 
	He isकाल , because He gathers all towards Himself all the things, 
	moving and non-moving, by such delightful qualities.
*420
 परमेष्ठी  He who is in the Supreme abode.
	After sporting thus in this world by hunting the राक्षसा-s and 
	protecting the people, He goes and stays in the Supreme Abode. 
	So He is परमेष्ठी . Vide :
	The affix 'ini' comes after the root 'स्था' (to stand) preceded 
	by the word 'paramऍ'.
	The 's' of 'sttha' is changed to 'ष' after 'amba', 'आम्ब' etc. 
	The Locative ending is not elided after a stem ending in a consonant
	or a short 'a', when the compound is a name.
	"He entered the resplendent world of विष्णु  with His own 
	body and His followers."
	The same is stated in the सभा पर्व  also. Vide :
	"Thus the long-armed राम , the scion of the इक्ष्वाकु  race 
	would slay रावण  with all his hosts and ascend to the Heaven."
*421
 परिग्रहः He who takes all with Him. 
	Here, there and everywhere, He accepts allParigrahah. He brought 
	about the attainment of the Transcendent World (Parama-pada) not 
	only to the citizens (of अयोध्य ) and the subjects (of His kingdom)
	 who had direct contact with Him and those related to them, but 
	also the gods they worshipped and their gardens along with their 
	trees, grass etc.
	"Whoever had love and devotion for His Incarnations."
	The predominant characteristic in श्री रामावतार  is amiability.
*422
 उग्रः The Formidable. 
	At the end of the (Kali) yuga when all are more inclined to commit
	 sins and there is great confusion in the divisions of caste and 
	the several stages of life (वर्णा and आश्रम). भगवान्  becomes 
	Ugrafurious and wrathful.
	His Manthra portrays Him thus : "Unto Him who is the very embodiment 
	of destruction and is like the death-giving वैश्वानर  Fire."
	श्री पौष्कर  (Samhitha) says : "भगवान् विष्णु  incarnates Himself 
	as Kalki when there is complete destruction of Dharma (virtue) 
	and after destroying the hosts of Mlecchas remains in this world".
	The word 'ugra' is derived from the root 'uch' (to collect).
	'Rijra', 'indra', 'agra', 'ugra' and other words are formed 
	irregularly (by the addition of the affix 'ran').
*423
 संवत्सरः He  who resides. 
	He is called 'Samvathsarah' as He resides in the पाताळलोक  
	reclining on Anantha (the आदिशेष ) fully armed with all the 
	weapons ready for action awaiting the time (for manifestation).
	The injunction for meditation on Him is as follows :
	"Him Who has mounted the Anantha-couch."
	"He Who is surrounded by Discus and other weapons, all in embdded 
	forms." The word 'Samvathsara' is derived from the root 'vasathi' 
	preceded by the preposition 'sam'.
	"The affix 'sara' comes after the root 'vas' (to dwell) when 
	it is preceded by an उपपद  and the affix is treated as 'cit' 
	which places the accent on the last syllable.
	'sam+vas+sara(the 's' of 'vas' is changed to 'th' because 'sara' 
	is an 'अर्धधातुक ' suffix beginning with 'sa'.
*424
 दक्षः He who is quick in action.
	"Kalki will be ever roaming about the world engaged in the 
	destruction of the Dasyus (miscreants). He will annihilate the 
	Dasyus who are crying hoarse intensety."
	As stated above भगवान्  is quick in the act of exterminating 
	the Dasyus. So He is दक्ष .
	"Very quickly does जनार्दन  act" says another text.
	"The word 'dakढa' is derived from the root ' दक्ष ' (to grow or act 
	quickly).
*425
 विश्रामः  The place of rest. 
	भगवान् is the place of rest for those beings who are extremely 
	tired by the heavy burden of their sins and by the experience of 
	their fruits.
	In सभा पर्वम्  ( महाभारत ) it is said :
	"भगवान्  comes into this world for the growth of Dharma and for 
	the protection of the Brahmins (who are pious)."
*426
 विश्वदक्षिणः He Who is well-disposed towards all.
	How can it be said that He is benevolent to those who are evil-doers?
	 The answer is  विश्वदक्षिणः. He shows His favour uniformly towards 
	all, whether their actions are right or wrong. Benevolence is that 
	quality which shढows forbearance even towards the wrong-doers. Vide :
	"He will shower His favour on the entire world."
	Or in the अश्व मेध  Sacrifice (conducted by श्री राम) 'Visvam'the 
	entire Earth was 'दक्षिण'the gift to the Brahmins given by Him. 
	So He is  विश्वदक्षिणः . Vide in the अरण्य पर्व  (महाभारत) :
	"Then He will destroy all the robbers and will offer this Earth 
	itself as दक्षिण  in the great अश्वमेध  Sacrifice to the Brahmins 
	(officiating as priests in the sacrifice).
	"The affix 'inan' is added to the roots 'dru' and 'दक्षि'" dru 
	(द्राविण); दक्षि (दक्षिण).
*427
 विस्तारः He who spreads. 
	He is विस्तारः . From Him Who destroys the Kali Yuga by great force and
	 establishes the Krutha Yuga, the moral laws of the वेदास्  spread out.
	 Vide :
	"O भारत ! Then with the advent of the Kritha Yuga, there will be 
	the end of Adharma (unrighteousness) and the rise of Dharma 
	(righteousness). People will begin to do meritorious acts."
	"The affix 'ghajn' comes after the root 'sthr' (to cover) when the 
	preposition " 'vi' is in composition with it, when the sense is 
	that of extension and when such spreading does not refer to words. 
	(Vi+sthr=विस्तारः ).
* 428
 स्थावरस्थाणुः He who is tranquil after the establishment of the dharma.
	When the Dharma has been firmly established, He would be tranquil.
	In the अरण्य पर्व  : "After establishing the auspicious moral law 
	of the Universe as laid down by the four-faced God (Brahma)"
*429
 प्रमाणं The authority.
	Then He is the Authority (प्रमाणं ) for determining what is good 
	and what is bad for the people who live in the Krutha Yuga. 
	Perception and other means of knowledge are considered authoritative
	by being activated by this power of His. Vide :
	"Human beings who live in this world follow only this mode of His 
	action."
*430
 बीजम् अव्ययम् The Seed Imperishable.
	He is बीजम् अव्ययम् . From Him at the end of the droughts like 
	Kali-yuga etc., Dharma grows again and again.
*431
अर्थः The goal. 
	भगवान्  is the only goal for that qualified person with superior 
	attainments who is exclusively devoted to Him and who has correct 
	and perfect knowledge. Vide :
	"The man of wisdom takes refuge in Me with this thought that 
	वासुदेव  is everything."
	"The affix 'than' comes after the roots 'उष', 'कुष', 'gai' and 
	'ri'. (Ri (to go) + tha = arttha).
*432
 अनर्थः He who is not the goal. 
	He is not sought after disinterestedly (Anarttha) by a person who 
	has only a little merit and who is after the acquisition of wealth. 
	If that person comes to Him, it is only with a desire for acquiring 
	wealth. Vide :
	"कुबेर  (एक-पिङ्ग ) seeks me for wealth."
	"There are three other kinds of devotees of Mine and they are known 
	to be desirous of other fruits. (The three kinds of devotees are : 
	they who want to regain their lost wealth, they who are eager to 
	acquire new wealth and they who long for the Realisation of the Self 
	(Kaivalya)."
	एक पिङ्गतीs is an epithet of कुबेर  (having a yellow mark in the 
	place of one of this eyes).
*433
 महाकोशः He who has a great Treasure.
	भगवान्  has vast treasures (महा कोश ) in His possession which
	 never become less even though they may be given as gifts to all at 
	all times and in all ways-treasures like Sankha, Padma etc. and the 
	रोहण  mountain.
	The inexhaustible nine Nidhis or treasures are :
	1. 	Sankha, 2. Padma,  3. महा -padma,  4. Makara,  5. Kacchapa,  
	6. Mukunda,  7. Kunda,  8. नीला  and 9. Kharva or Vara.
*434
 महाभोगः He Who has objects of great enjoyment. 
	Great sensual gratifications which have got to be acquired by 
	means of wealth, they too can be had from Him. So He is महाभओग. 
	Vide :
	"From the worshiip (of Indra  and other gods who are only My 
	manifestations) they obtain the objects of their desires as ordained 
	by Myself."
*435
महाधनः  He of great wealth. he is endowed with immesuareable
       and unlimited wealth to be given to those who need it. 
	He is endowed with immeasurable and unlimited wealth to be given 
	to those who need it. He is महाधनः .
	All this has been stated by प्रह्लाद  himself :
	"Dharma in an endless manner has been got from Him by the revered 
	मारीचि, धक्ष  and others. Similarly wealth has been obtained from 
	Him by others. Likewise, by yet others काम (the sensual enjoyment) 
*436
 अनिर्विण्णः  He who is never despondent.  
	Thus भगवान्  creates this world and grants the respective 
desires of the people (thinking that they would resort to Him for their 
redemption). But the worldly-minded are infatuated by the pleasures of 
the world and are not inclined to turn to Him. Thus His expectations 
are not successful. In spite of this भगवान्  does not become dispirited 
or despondent and again with the fond hope that He will succeed in His next
 effort, (i.e. diligence) continues His acts. So He is अनिर्विण्णः. It is 
because of this that there is neither beginning nor end for the creation 
of the world by भगावन् .
	"These acts of creation, protection, destruction and control 
by  भगावन्  go on uninterruptedly."
*437
 स्थविष्ठः He who is of an extremely prodigious size. 
	The famous cluster of Stars known as शिंशुमार-चक्र  in Heavens 
described in the उत्तम-अनुवाक  of स्वाध्याय -ब्राह्मण  and विष्णु पुराण  
is an example for the absence of despondency and for the ceaseless effort
 for redeeming the world seen in भगवान् . He is स्थविष्ठः because of 
His prodigious size in the form of a cluster of stars. Vide :
	"The all-powerful भगवान्  has a body in the form of Simsumँra 
consisting of a group of Stars."
Note : शिंशुमार the Gangetic porpoise (a form of विषणु ). It is 
described as a collection of stars and planets (in the north-east point).
*438
 भूः The al supporter.
	Because of His connection with the Constellation Dhruva. 
He is the support of all. So His name is Bhu:h. Vide :
	"At the tail-end of the शिशुमर -group stands Dhruva."
*439
 धर्मयूपः He who is united with Dharma. 
	He has united the principle of Dharma with a part of His body, viz. 
The head. Vide :
	"Dharma has resorted to His head".
	"His head itself is Dharma."
	The word 'yu:pa' is derived from the root 'yu' (to join).
	"The affix 'pa' comes after the roots 'ku' and 'yu' and the 
vowel of the root is lengthened (ku+pa=ku:pa; yu+pa= yu:pa, the sacrificial post.)
*440
 महामखः He who is the great sacrifice. 
	He has Dharma as His body, and the sacred 'yajna' (sacrifice) also 
is an organ of His. So He is Mahँmakhah. Vide :
	"Sacrifice must be taken as a Dharma".
*441
 नक्षत्रनेमिः He who makes the stars move.He makes the wheel of star
*442
 नक्षत्री He Who has the stars.
	"There is a cluster of luminaries in the sky in the form of 
शिशुमार  (porpoise). नारायण  makes them move. With His place in the 
heart of those luminaries, He is their support."
	Thus भगवान्  is the support of all these luminaries and so He is 
called नक्षत्री
*443
 क्षमः He Who is competent. 
	Thus,  भगवान्  bears with ease the burden of the entire UniverseKढamah.
	"He is known as प्रवाह  since, He bears all the luminaries."
*444
 क्षामः He  Who is in a diminished form. 
	At the time of the interim deluge when the other stars have 
disappeared, He alone remains in an emaciated form   क्षामः.
	"A group of four stars of the शिशुमार  does not set."
	"O मैत्रेय ! At the time of  the dissolution of the Earth 
inclusive of the five elements, all the luminaries up to the region 
of Dhruva disappear and Dhruva alone remains shining in his place."
	The word ' क्षामः' is derived from the root 'क्षज' (to waste away).
	"Ma' is substituted for the 'निष्ठ' (past passive Participle) 
'tta' after the root 'क्षयि'.
*445
 समीहनः He who makes others work in their respective posts.
	After the deluge at the time of creation He always makes all do 
their work in their respective posts.
	"All the beings go round Thee again and again."
	In उद्योग पर्व  (महाभारत ) :
	"जनार्दन , the Supreme पुरुष , sets in motion, as if in sport, 
the Earth, the Heavens, the Interim Space as well as all the beings.
*446
 यज्ञः The Sacrifice. 
	भगवान्  has been delineated in the विष्णु पुराण  as the sacrifice, 
its means and the ultimate goal (its fruit). The section there begins 
thus :
	"In that place where Dhruva has been stationed in the firmament, 
that placewhich is known as the विष्णु पाद in the third region, which 
is celestial and resplendent."
Then it proceeds to describe in order the several regions of 
Dhruva, the luminaries, clouds and rains.
	This Earth is the fruit of 'ijya' (sacrifice) and 'ijya' has this 
world as its foundation."
	"Then the fires are nourished through the offerings of ghee in 
sacrifices."
	Therefore भगवान्  Himself is called Yajna. Vide :
	"Sacrifice itself is विष्णु ."
	"After the verbs 'yaj' (to worढip), 'यच्' (to ask for), 'yath' 
(to strive), 'vich' (to shine), 'pracch' (to ask) and 'raksh' (to preserve) 
comes the affix 'nagn' with the force of denoting mere action etc."
*447
 इज्यः He who is the object of worship. 
He alone is the worthy object of worढip that is done indirectly through 
Indra and other gods by people whose aim is to acquire 'काम ' or fruits 
of a lower order.
	"Those who worship the Pithru (the spirits of their forefathers), 
the gods, the Brahmins as well as Agni (Fire)they (in reality) worship 
only विष्णु  Who is the Inner Soul of all beings."
	"Those, however, who are devotees of other gods and with great 
faith worship them, (they too worship only Me, but not in the manner and 
according to the rules prescribed there-to)."  (श्री कृष्ण in the गीत).
	"(भगवान्  Who is the Supreme Person is adored) by the man who 
performs the duties and rites of his वर्ण and आश्रम. Nothing else delights 
भगवान्  so much)" And so on.
*448
 महेज्यः  He who is the object of superior worship.
	He is महेज्यः (the object of supreme worship) which is not sullied 
by desire for other fruits.
	"But I redeem them who surrender all actions unto Me, (who hold Me 
as the Supreme goal, worship Me and meditate on me with exclusive devotion)"
	"Surrender all actions unto Me, (with a mind devoted to the self 
free from desire and selfishness. Fight without the fever of attachment 
and anxiety.)"
*449
 क्रतु Object of sacrificial acts.
	The five महा यज्ञ-s, The seven पाक-यज्ञा-s like औपासन  etc., 
the seven हविर् -.यज्ञा-s like Agni-होत्र  etc.,--all these have been laid 
down in the वेदा-s and they have been referred to by the name 'Yajna' (446) 
mentioned above. The Krathus are the seven सोम-संस्था comprising 
Agni-होत्र  and the like. भगवान्  is worshipped by all these Krathus.
	The word 'Krathu' which means 'that which is conducted' is derived 
from the root 'kru' (to do).
	"The affix 'krathu' comes after the verb 'kru' (to do)"
	Note : The Pancha महा-यज्ञा-s are :
	1.    Brahma-yagjnaTeaching and reciting the वेदा-s.
	2. 	Pithru-yagjnaOfferning of libations of water every day to the
 deceased ancestors (i.e. तर्पण ).
	3. 	देव-यज्ञ sacrifice made to the superior gods made by 
oblations to the fire or through fire to gods.
	4. 	भुत-यज्ञबलि  (i.e. the offering of a portion of the 
daily meal (of rice, grain, ghee etc.) to all creatures. It is 
usually performed by throwing up into the air, near the house 
during  portions of the daily meal before partaking of it.
5. 	मनुष्य-यज्ञThe sacrifice to be offered to men, (i.e.
hospitable reception of guests).
*450
 सत्रं He who is the sacrifice.
	Saththra is a sacrificial session, especially one lasting from 
13 to 100 days conducted by many यजमाना (masters). भगवान्  is called 
Saththra, because He is there always in the Saththra as the object of 
worship.
	The word 'saththra' is derived from the root 'sad' (सीदाती) 
signifying movement.
	"The affix 'thra' comes after the following roots : 'gu' 'dhru' 
vee', 'pach' 'vach', 'yam', 'sad' and 'kshad'.
*451
 सतां गतिः  The Goal of the pious. 
So far भगवान्  has been described as the goal of house who follow 
the Pravriththi-dharma, having an attachment to the business and pleasures 
of the world. Next it is stated that He is also the goal for those who are 
wedded to Nivruththi-dharma (i.e. discontinuance of wordly acts or emotions.
(quietism).
	विष्णु पुराण  itself says : "O Brahmin! That is a sublime place for 
यती-s (i.e. योगिns) who have washed off the mire of sins and who have 
controlled their minds when all their merits and sins have been annihilated."
*452
 सर्वदर्शी The all seer. 
	It is His nature to preside over and witness the practice of the two 
kinds of Dharma (namely Pravruththi-dharma and Nivruththi-dharma).
	"When habit is to be expressed, the affix 'nini' comes after a verb, 
provided the word, with a case-affix in composition with it does not mean 
a genus."
*453
 निवृत्तात्मा He whose mind is turned away from worldly desires
	The forms of भगवान्  as नर ,नारायण  etc. are for instructing the 
world in the Nivruththi-dharma, one of the two धर्मा-s. To indicate His 
profound non-attachment to material objects of pleasure, He has His mind 
withdrawn from them.
	About His meditation it is said : "He Who has His thoughts 
concentrated within Himself."
	"Unto Him Who is ever engaged in the meditation of His own soul."
	"Him with His mind fixed on the lotus-heart."
*454
 सर्वज्ञो The Omniscient. 
	भगवान्  is सर्वज्ञ , since He knows His Self in all its aspects.
	"Him Who unites His soul with the indestructible and Supreme Abode."
*455
 ज्ञानम् उत्तमम् The greatest knowledge.
	The great वैष्णव  Dharma in all its entirety can be learnt from Him.
	"Him Who propounds all the Sasthrँs including the पञ्च रात्र ."
*456
 सुव्रतः He of good vows.
	"O Arjuna! (Son of पार्थ )! There is nothing that I have to do for 
self-advancement."
	On this principle all the acts of भगवान्  are for the good of others 
and therefore all His observances are always auspiciousSuvratha.
	"A person should meditate upon Him as standing on one leg, living on 
air and teaching the fornightly and monthly fasts (by observing them.)
*457
 सुमुखः He with a charming face.
He has a face which is unchanging pleasing and delightful even while 
reciting the Manthra and other things. So He is Sumukha.
	"He is chanting the Manthra 'ॐ-कार' by name which has been realised 
by Him within Himself."
	The Manthra about Him says : "To श्री कृष्ण, Who has a face with eyes 
pure and spotless like the lotus-petal."
*458
 सूक्ष्मः The subtle. 
He is सूक्ष्मः  because of His essential nature which is extremely subtle 
and can be realised by deep and unsullied meditation.
	"All were engaged in the meditation on Brahman."
	"The suffix 'sman' comes after the root 'su:ch' (to pierce). 
(सूच+स्म=सूक्ष्मः).
*459
 सुघोषः He Who has the delightful voice of the Vedas in praise 
of Him.
	He is proclaimed by the वेदिc voice of the Upanishads.
*460
 सुखदः The bliss -giver.
	He bestows the fruit in the form of Supreme Bliss (Sukhada) on those 
who practise good conduct and deep meditation by Himself observing them.
*461
 सुहृत् The good -hearted.
	Wherefore this diligence to help others? Because He is Suhruth-a 
kind-hearted friend. Friendliness is that quality of a benevolent person 
who wished the good even for those who have not helped him in any way, and 
who being apprehensive of any evil that may befall them, always thinks 
'How shall I help them?'.
*462
 मनोहरः  He  who captivates the heart. He captivates their heart 
by His innate benevolence.
	He captivates their heart by His innate benevolence.
	"The affix 'ach' comes after the root 'hru' when it does not mean 
to raise up and when the object is in composition with it."
*463
 जितक्रोधः He who has overcome anger. Anger and other such bad 
qualities have been conquered by Bhagavan. So He is  जितक्रोधः. On seeing 
His form the minds of the Asuras became confounded with confusion and thereby He
overcame the anger of the Asuras against the gods.
On seeing His form the minds of the असुरा-s became confounded with 
confusion and thereby He overcame the anger of the असुरा-s  against the gods.
*464
 वीरबाहुः He of mighty arms. 
	He has a thousand arms which vie with one another in the wonderful
 act of churningarms which are shining with effulgent bracelets, armlets 
and garlands.
*465
 विदारणः He who cuts. With his celestial weapons He cut off 
Rahu and others.
	With His celestial weapons He cut off राहु  and others.
The Manthra about Him is : "He Who completely cuts off the formidable 
fear."
*466
 स्वापनः  He Who lulls them to sleep. 
	With His elegant and lovely smiles, sweet glances and the play 
of His eyebrows, भगवान्  fascinates and brings under His control those
that stay behind when others have gone. He is स्वप्न .
	"He with eyes full of exuberant love and blooming youth".
*467
 स्ववशः  He who is under His own control.
	When others are asleep, He plays as he likes with those who are 
his own (i.e. gods).
*468
 व्यापी The Pervader. In order to rejuvenate the gods, the 
Asuras, the Mandara mountain, Vasuki and others at the time of churning 
He pervades them with His own power. So He is Vyaapee.
	In order to rejuvenate the gods the असुरा-s, the Mandara mountain, 
Vँsuki and others at the time of churning He pervades them with His own 
power. So He is व्यापी".
*469
 नैकात्मा He with diverse forms. 
	He is नैकात्मा , because He had assumed many forms at the time of 
churning, one as विष्णु  (to help the gods to churn), another as the 
Tortoise (to support the Mandara Mountain) and yet another as मोहिनि  
(to distribute the nectar).
*470
 नैककर्मकृत् He of diverse acts. 
	He did many acts like churning the ocean, supporting the mountain, 
overcoming the enemies, distributing the nectar and others. Thus He is 
Naika-karma-kruth.
*471
 वत्सरः He who lives within all beings.
	Next भगवान्   is described as धर्मात्मते  embodiment of Dharma. 
For bestowing fruits in a just way for the acts of all, He resides in all 
beings. "The affix 'chara' comes after the root 'vas' (to dwell). 
(vas+chara=vathsara).The words in His Manthra are : "Unto Him Who is the 
embodiment of Dharma and Who lives in all beings."
*472
 वत्सलः The Affectionate.
	The cause for that quality is described by the name Vathsala. 
He is affectionate towards His children who are attached to Him. He has 
great love and affection for those who have sought refuge in Him. Even 
though they have been with Him for a long time, He is eager to do 
something for their good for some inexplicable reason. This can be 
compared to the young mother cows' love for their new-born calves which 
(cows), not knowing what to do simply bellow and suffer from the burden 
of the udder full of milk which is trickling down. That भगवान्  has 
such a quality is well-known from the attitude of श्री राम  towards रावण . 
This is known from the words of सीता  :
	"It is well-known that राम  knows this great virtue, and that He 
is very affectionate towards those who who have sought refuge in Him".
	Since, भगवान्  has taken this quality as an instrument in the 
protection of His devotees, that quality too has attained a reputation 
and popularity.
	"The affix 'lach' comes after the words 'vathsa' and 'amsa' in the 
sense of love and strength respectively."
*473
 वत्सी He  who is possessed of such loving children. 
	There are innumerable hosts of souls who are to be ever tended by Him.
	"The affixes 'ini' and 'than' come in the sense of 'mathup' (being 
in possession of) after nominal stems ending in short 'a'; and in the 
alternative 'mathup' also comes.
	Here the affix 'ini' has come in the sense of constant connection 
with objects which are in great numbers.
*474
 रत्नगर्भः He who is in possession of abundant wealth.
	Amongst His devotees there are some who are after wealth, and भगवान्  has immense 
wealth to be given to them.
	"Under the guise of the Conch and the Discus, He bears अर्था and काम (wealth and desire)".
*475
 धनेश्वरः The quick giver of wealth. 
	He is quick in bestowing on His devotees whatever wealth they desire.
	"The affix 'varath' comes after the root 'as' (to pervade) when the 
word formed from it refers to 'having the power of granting success soon'. 
By the letter 'cha' the penultimate letter 'a' in 'as' is replaced by 'ं'.
*476
 धर्मगुप् The Protector of Dharma virtue. 
	He confers अर्थ  and काम ; but He sees they are not misused and He 
protects Dharma through them.
	"He confers अर्थ  and काम on those who wisely follow the path of 
Dharma (Virtue) with discretion."
*477
 धर्मकृत् He who practices Dharma (virtue).
	Thus He makes all become addicted to Dharma and without any ulterior 
motive practises Dharma which is for their good.
	"Ordinary flawless Dharma, which is without beginning or end all 
pervasive, cannot be attained without His Grace even by those who have 
great knowledge."
*478
 धर्मी He wh has Dharma as an instrument. 
	He is धर्मी , because He has the well-known Dharma as a common means 
for all His acts.
*479
 सत् He who is comendable. 
	भगवान्  is Sath, because the Dharma mentioned above is itself 
	commendable."Likewise the word 'Sath', O Arjuna! Is employed with 
reference to a commendable action."
	The commendable nature of Dharma is due to the fact that Bhagavँn 
Who is to be attained by it is Himself highly commendable. His praise-
worthiness is due to His eternal existence and auspiciousness which are 
unconditioned. The word 'Sath' is used in the sense of 'existence' and 
'auspiciousness".
*480 सदक्षरम् He Who is ever existent without decrease or destruction.He is सदक्षर  because His existence and goodness are eternal and unconditioned. Here the word 'अक्षर' is an adjective that qualifies the noun 'Sat'. 'क्षरम्' is that which comes to an end in some place or at some time. The true nature of भगवान् as सद्-अक्षर  is described as follows :He is free from decrease, destruction, modification, growth and birth. He can only be spoken of as that which always is."The same is declared by the श्रुति also : "Existence alone, my dear child, this was in the beginning, one only without a second."*481
 असत् क्षरम् The giver of the worldly misery.
In regard to those who are not commendable and are addicted to sins. 
भगवान्  gives them the great misery of endless संसार  (Birth and death).
	These two are spoken of in the Sruthi also :
	"भगवान्  Himself makes that person do virtuous acts whom He wants 
to raise from these worlds. And He makes that another do sinful acts whom 
He wants to hurl into the lower worlds."
	"This world comprises the good and the bad. Bhagavँn is above both of 
them-the Asath and the sath."
*482
 असत् क्षरम् The giver of the worldly misery.
In regard to those who are not commendable and are addicted to sins. 
भगवान्  gives them the great misery of endless संसार  (Birth and death).
	These two are spoken of in the Sruthi also :
	"भगवान्  Himself makes that person do virtuous acts whom He wants 
to raise from these worlds. And He makes that another do sinful acts whom 
He wants to hurl into the lower worlds."
	"This world comprises the good and the bad. Bhagavँn is above both of 
them-the Asath and the sath."
*483
 अविज्ञाता The Non-cognizant. 
	Even though He sees the innumerable sins committed by the pious 
devotees, He not only does not punish them, but also forgives them. Not 
only this much. He is even oblivious of their sins. So is it stated about 
श्री राम  :
	"Though harsh words are used against Him, राम does not retaliate."
	Not taking into account the faults committed by those who have taken 
refuge in भगवान्  is certainly a quality that is commendable. Therefore my 
revered father (श्री Vatsanka Misra, Koratthalvan) has said :
	"Thus we speak in reproof of Thy omni-science and say Thou art 
ignorant. Thou dost dote on the faults of Thy devotees."
	There are some who hold the view with reference to the Brahman, 
which is all-knowing, that it is pure consciousness and so not possessed 
of knowledge. They are really deaf to the words of the वेदा-s, the 
conclusions of the आचार्या-s and even to logical propriety. Those poor 
people are only to be pitied and are not worthy of refutation or criticism.
*484
 सहस्रांशुः He who has thousand rays of knowledge.
	On the other hand He is omni-scient. Sahasra-amsuh'Sahasram' means 
countless and 'Amsu' means varieties of knowledge; So भगवान्  has infinite 
knowledge.
	An objection may be raised : Is it not a contradiction to say that 
He is all-knowing and that He does not know the faults of His devotees? 
'No' we say. Ignorance of the faults of His devotees means only that He 
ignores tham as being insignificant. He pays no attention to their faults. 
Vide :
	"Even a man of wicked deeds is a good man provided he worships Me 
without expecting any other benefit. (He is must be honoured; because his 
knowledge is sound.)"
*485
 विधाता  The controller. It cannot be said that even though
	It cannot be said that even though भगवान्  forgives the sinning 
devotee, the latter will have to experience the punishment and tortures 
meted out to him by Yama whose duty is to punish the sinners. For Yama 
also is under the control of भगवान्  (and he cannot do anything against 
His will. The name विधाता  (the Supreme Controller) signifies this.
	Yama himself says (in विष्णु पुराण) :
	"The Supreme Lord Who is worshipped by Indra and other gods knows 
that I am impartial and so He has ordained me to do good or bad to people 
in the world according to their deserts."
*486
 कृतलक्षणः  
	He Who has prescribed the distinguishing characteristics (for the 
pious).If भगवान्  Himself overlooks the faults of men, what is there 
that will distinguish the good from the bad by which He will accept the 
former and discard the latter? The reply is कृता-लक्षणः . He has laid 
down the distinguiढing characteristics of those who are to be favoured, 
viz. They are well disposed towards Him.
	("Never shall I desert) him who has come to Me as a friend."
	"For he is rightly resolved". (when he seeks me with great devotion).
	Vide in Hari-vamsa :
	"They who bear the mark of the discus on their bodies may be admitted 
to my vicinity and they that do not have the mark ढould not be admitted 
near me."
	"In विष्णु-dharma :
	"While you are going about in the world, you will see that man alone 
violates my commands who does not bear mark of having sought refuge in 
विष्णु."
	In विष्णु तत्व  :
	"The bearing of the mark of the discus and others on the body is 
indicative of his connection with Me even as the bracelet and other 
ornaments indicates the chastity of a woman (whose husband is alive)".
	This (bearing the mark of the discus) also may be the distinguiढing 
mark of a devotee of  विष्णु . Anything other than this will lead only to 
his abandonment and therefore there is no room for the charge of 
partiality or cruelty in भगवान् .
*487
 गभस्तिनेमिः He with an effulgwnt Discus. 
	Those who bear these marks are unassailable to Yama and his servants. 
For their saviour is भगवान्  Who is armed with the effulgent Chakra 
having a thousand spokes.
	"You should not even go near that place which is within the range of 
the glances of that devotee in whose heart the Supreme and imperishable 
Lord नारायण  resides. In fact I too cannot go there because my valour 
and strength cannot stand before the Discus. Thet devotee belongs to an 
entirely different world." (This is the instruction of Yama to his 
servants.)
*488
 सत्त्वस्थः He is in their hearts.
	Again they are impregnable to Yama and his followers since there is 
no Karma in them which alone is the cause of their sway over them, How is 
it they alone are devold of Karma? The answer is because भगवान्  resides 
in their hearts(Saththvastthah).
	"When Lord Hari, Who is imperishable and eternal and Who wields the 
Discus and the Mace, abides in the heart of a person, how can sin exist 
there? Because the sin has been destroyed by Him. How can darkness co-exist 
with the Sun?"
	"When विष्णु  Who is flawless like a spotless crystal gem is in the 
heart of a person, how can the defects like jealousy remain there?"
	So says the विष्णु-धर्म  :
	"When a man's mind has resorted to कृष्ण  at all times, the servants 
of Yama, his staff or ropes and the tortures cannot come near him."
	प्रह्लाद  says in the वामन-पुराण  :
	"Truly yet another thing has been declared by इक्ष्वाकु  who is the 
foremost among men and who is endowed with Bhakthi viz. That those people 
in the world who are devotees of विष्णु  are not under the control of Yama; 
not are they the denizens of his world."
	"The affix 'ka' comes after the root 'sthaa' when it is in 
composition with a word ending in a case-affix as an उपपद.
	(Hrudi+stthah=Hrudi-stthah). (Saththva+stthah=Saththva-stthah).
*489
 सिंहः He who punishes.
Not realising the greatness of devotees, if Yama and others assail 
them thinking that they are ordinary human beings, भगवान्  punishes those 
assailants. So He is called 'Simhah'.
	Yama himself declares :
	"विष्णु  has the power to control me also."
	Therefore मार्कण्डेय  says in Lainga (पुराण ) :
	"When the gods see a वैष्णव  who is exclusively devoted to वासुदेव  
(विष्णु ) and whose sins have been completely burnt out, they are afraid 
(of doing any harm to him) : They bow before him with respect and go 
away as they came.
	Yama also, who is the son of the Sun-god, on seeing a devout श्री  
वैष्णव  bereft of all sins, would rise with respect and bow before him 
with folded hands.
	Therefore a person should worship with devotion the श्री  वैष्णव-s 
as विष्णु Himself. The वैष्णव attain union with विष्णु. No doubt should 
be entertained about this."
	Again in the same (Lainga पुराण ) in the episode of Kausika the 
action of Brahma is described when he comes across some devotees of विष्णु 
who are singing His glories :
	"Brahma the पितामह  (that is the grandfather the first creator) 
of the world, on seeking Kausika and other god-singers advanced towards 
them with respect, welcomed and worshipped them."
	In that story which begins thus much can be found relevant to this 
topic to the heart's content.
	In विष्णु -thaththva beginning to speak of hell it is said :
	"The servants of Yama automatically keep themselves away from those 
who have taken refuge at the feet of भगवान्  Hari, and for whom Hari is 
the only master and no one else.
	Even the gods who are in charge of the Hell are afraid to do any 
harm to the वैष्णवा-s, because any insult to them will bring about the 
destruction of the entire world.
	Ever since the beginning of the world no devotee of विष्णु has ever 
been in the Hell. This is due to the great power  of the valour of the 
Supreme being, भगवान्."
	Again in विष्णु  Dharma :
	"Yama, the Lord of Hell, saw a being that was experiencing great 
suffering there and asked him, 'Have you not worshipped Lord केशव Who 
is the remover of all sorrows?'" And so on.
*490
 भूतमहेश्वरः The supreme lord of all beings.
	Since भगवान्  is capable of accomplishing all this He is 
भुत-महेश्वर . It is He that controls Brahma, Yama and others who 
are themselves lords of beings.
*491
 आदिदेवः 
	He Who is the first cause and is endowed with effulgence.
	भगवान्  is the cause of all those gods also and is possessed of 
great splendour which subjugates them. So He is आदिदेवः  . He is Adi-the 
cause and deva-ever-shining.
	"The wind blows out of fear from Him."
*492
महादेवः  The great player.
	He is महादेव  since He plays with those gods as playthings like 
dolls etc.
*493
 देवेशः The ruler of gods.
	He is also the master of those gods.
*494
 देवभृत् The Supporter of the gods.
	भगवान्  is capable of assigning duties to the various gods 
according to their ability and thus protects them.
*495
 गुरुः The preceptor.
	He is Guru, because He gives instruction to the gods in their 
respective spheres of duty through the वेदा-s.
	"He Who teaches him (i.e. Brahma) the वेदा-s."
	"I am under the control of my Guru भगवान्  Hari"(says Brahma.)
	"Fire is 'guru' (the cause) of gold in purifying it from dirt (just 
like this भगवान्  is guru of all since He enlightens them by dispelling 
their ignorance through the वेदा-s )."
"He is the teacher of even the ancients, for He is eternal and not 
limited by time."
This preceptorship of  भगवान्  is very well-known in the story of 
Haya-siras (i.e. हयग्रीव ) :
"O King! Hari, as Haya-griva, (the Horse-faced God) rescued the 
वेदा-s  from the Nether-worlds and taught them to Brahma. Then He re-assumed 
His own form."
	This is known also from the texts like the following :
"In times of yore all the Vऍdँs were brought back from the 
रसातल ."
*496
 उत्तरः The rescuer. He rescued Brahma and others frm the 
trouble  of Asuras.
	He is Uththara, because He rescued Brahma and others from the trouble 
of the असुरा-s.
	"Thus praised by the gods, भगवान् , the multi-faced Lord gave up 
His sleep and became ready to do the work of gods."
*497
 गोपतिः The master of all words.
	"He is the Master of all speech, both in the form of the वेदा-s and 
spoken languages.	So does the Hayagrंva Manthra say : "Unto the Master of 
all speech."
*498
 गोप्ता The Saviour.
	Thus He protects all kinds of learning as ' गोप्ता'.
	His Manthra reads : "To Him-Who is the Lord of all learning".
*499
 ज्ञानगम्यः He who is to be realised by knowledge.
	"Meditation should be done on the Supreme Horse-faced Lord, Who is 
the Master of  all speech."
	"The affix 'yath' comes after a root which ends in a labial letter 
preceded by a short 'a'."
*500
 पुरातनः The Ancient.
	This revelation of learning is done not only now, but in every Kalpa 
(aeon)."After the words 'सायम् ' chiram (after a long time) etc., and after 
indeclinables expressing time, there are the affixes 'thyu' and 'thyul'; 
and their augment is 'thuth'.
