 फलश्रुतिश्लोकाः

अथ अस्य नामसहस्रस्य गौरवं ग्राहयन् शान्तनवः कौन्तेयमाह - इतीदम् इति ।।
इतीदं कीर्तनीयस्य केशवस्य महात्मनः ।
नाम्नां सहस्रं दिव्यानामशेषेण प्रकीर्तितम् ।। 1 ।।
"	यदेतत्कीर्तनं भगवन्महिम्नि, अद्यप्रभृति भगवान् कीर्तनारंभम् अर्हतीत्युक्तं"
कीर्तनीयस्य इति । अत्र कारणं केशवस्य महात्मनः इति । नाम्नां प्राकृतपरमपद-
व्यवहारयोग्यत्वमाह - दिव्यानाम् इति । त्वद्गौरवात् किंचिदपि ज्ञातव्यं न हापितम्
इत्याह - अशेषेण इति ।।
"	Then Bhishma (the son of king Santanu) said to Yudhishthira"
(the son of Kunti):
"	Thus the thousand divine names of Bhagavan Kesava, the"
Supreme Being, Who is worthy of being praised, have been sung in
all their entirety.
"	The word 'Keertaneeyasya' (worthy of being praised) signifies"
that Bhagavan's greatness has been sung in this way and recitation of
the names should be rightly begun from that day onwards; and Bhagavan
richly deserves it. The reason for the same is given by the two words
Kesavasya Mahaatmanah (He is Kesava, the Creator of both Brahma
and Siva; Mahaatma, the Supreme Being.) The word divyaanaam (divine)
indicates that the names are fit to be recited both in this material world and
in the transcendent Parama-pada. The word aseshena means that out of my
respect for you nothing has been left out which has got to be known.

य इदं शृणुयान्नित्यं यश्चापि परिकीर्तयेत् ।
नाशुभं प्राप्नुयात् किञ्चित् सोऽमुत्रेह च मानवः ।। 2 ।।
"	अथ अधिकारिफलाङ्गनिर्णयः । य इदं शृणुयात् इत्यादि । यथाधिकारं"
श्रवणमननयोः सामान्येन उभयलोकाशुभ- विरोधित्वं तावत् फलमुक्तम् ।।
"	In the next sloka the qualifications for the recitation and"
the result of the same are described.
"	Nothing inauspicious of unwelcome will accrue to that man"
who hear this daily and who also recites it, either in this world or in
the world beyond.
"	For a person who according to his qualification and ability"
hears it or revolves it in his mind, the fruit is declared in general
terms that there will be nothing inauspicious both in this world
and in the other.

अथ चतुर्णां वर्णविशेषाणाम् अनधिरूढ-भगवद्भक्तीनाम् अनाकांक्षित-फलविशेषाणां
यथायोग्यं फलमाह - वेदान्तगः इति ।।

वेदान्तगो ब्राह्मणः स्यात् क्षत्रियो विजयी भवेत् ।
वैश्यो धनसमृद्धः स्याच्छूद्रः सुखमवाप्नुयात् ।। 3 ।।
"	The next sloka mentions the fruit that will be got according"
to their desire by the members of the four castes who have not got
the intense devotion to God and who are not desirous of getting any
particular fruit.
"	If the person who recites it is a Brahmin, he will attain the"
knowledge of the Vedanta (the Upanishads). If he is a kshattriya, he
will become a great victor, if a Vaisya, he will acquire immense
wealth, and if a Sudra, he will enjoy great happiness.

अथ वर्णविशेषेण यथाकामम् अभ्युदयफलम् आह -- धर्मार्थी इति ।।
धर्मार्थी प्राप्नुयाद्धर्ममर्थार्थी चार्थमाप्नुयात् ।
कामानवाप्नुयात् कामी प्रजार्थी चाप्नुयात् प्रजाः ।। 4 ।।
"	This sloka declares the different kinds of fruits that will"
be acquired by the different castes according to their desires.
"	If a person recites the names with a desire for dharma"
(merit), he will get the dharma. If he is desirous of wealth, he
will get the riches. If he is after the pleasures of life, he will
get all of them. If he wants to have progeny, he will get
children.
अथ नियमविशेषवज्जपरूप-संकीर्तने भक्तस्य सर्वसमृद्धिमाह-
भक्तिमान् यः इत्यादिभिः चतुर्भिः ।।
भक्तिमान् यः सदोत्थाय शुचिस्तद्गतमानसः ।
सहस्रं वासुदेवस्य नाम्नामेतत्प्रकीर्तयेत् ।। 5 ।।
अनुत्तमं श्रेयः- मुक्तिः । अन्ये अभ्युदयविशेषाः ।।
"	Next four slokas state if a Bhakta (devotee) recites the"
names as a Japa (chanting) in accordance with the rules laid down
for the same, he will attain all kinds of prosperity.
"	Anuttamam sreyah - Salvation. All the rest are the fruits of"
success in this world. Let us take up the case of a person who is very
much devoted to the Lord. He gets up in the morning and purifies
himself (with bath and the observance of rites and rituals). Then with
his mind firmly fixed on Lord Vasudeva, he recites the thousand
names of Vasudeva.

यशः प्राप्नोति विपुलं ज्ञातिप्राधान्यमेव च ।
अचलां श्रियमाप्नोति श्रेयः प्राप्नोत्यनुत्तमम् ।। 6 ।।
"	He becomes endowed with great reputation and becomes"
the foremost amongst his kith and kin. He acquires undiminishing
wealth (in this world) and unexcelled prosperity (in the other, i.e.,
salvation).

न भयं क्वचिदाप्नोति वीर्यं तेजश्च विन्दति ।
भवत्यरोगो द्युतिमान् बलरूपगुणान्वितः ।। 7 ।।
"	There is no fear for him from any quarter. He acquires"
valour and power. He is never unwell and always shines very
much. He becomes endowed with strength, a healthy body and
noble qualities.

रोगार्तो मुच्यते रोगाद्बद्धो मुच्येत बन्धनात् ।
भयान्मुच्येत भीतस्तु मुच्येतापन्न आपदः ।। 8 ।।
"	He who is suffering from any disease will get rid of it."
He who is in bondage will be relieved of it. He who is affected
by the fear will become free from it and he who is in difficulties
will get rid of them.

अथ भगवदेकार्थिनः अनन्यभक्तेः अप्रार्थितामपि अनर्थनिवृत्तिमाह - दुर्गाणि इति ।।
दुर्गाण्यतितरत्याशु पुरुषः पुरुषोत्तमम् ।
स्तुवन्नामसहस्रेण नित्यं भक्तिसमन्वितः ।। 9 ।।
"	Next it is stated that if a person is exclusively devoted to"
Sri Krishna and his only desire is to attain Him, all his difficulties
will automatically vanish even though he does not pray to god for
any relief from them.
"	That person who with devotion praises the Supreme Being"
(Purushottama) reciting His thousand names daily, surmounts all
insuperable difficulties very quickly.

अथ तेषां तत्प्राप्तिमाह- वासुदेवाश्रय इति ।।
वासुदेवाश्रयो मर्त्यो वासुदेवपरायणः ।
सर्वपापविशुद्धात्मा याति ब्रह्म सनातनम् ।। 10 ।।
"	These two slokas speak of the attainment of the Lord by"
such devotees.
"	That man, who has taken resort to Vasudeva and who"
thinks that Vasudeva is the highest goal to be reached, becomes
cleansed of all sins and his mind becomes pure. He finally
attains the eternal Brahman.

न वासुदेवभक्तानामशुभं विद्यते क्वचित् ।
जन्ममृत्युजराव्याधिभयं वाप्युपजायते ।। 11 ।।
नियमवतो भक्तस्य अनुषङ्गिणीम् अभ्युदयसिद्धिमाह - इमं स्तवम् इति ।।
"	Nothing inauspicious ever occurs to the devotees of"
Vasudeva. Nor do they have any fear from birth and death
or old age and disease.

इमं स्तवमधीयानः श्रद्धाभक्तिसमन्वितः ।
युज्येतात्मसुखक्षान्ति-श्रीधृतिस्मृतिकीर्तिभिः ।। 12 ।।
श्रद्धा - सगौरव-त्वरा । भक्तिः व्याख्याता । आत्मा - चेतनः ।
भगवति भक्तिः महतः सुकृतस्य फलम् -
"""गोविन्दभक्त्यभ्यधिकं श्रेयश्च अन्यत् न विद्यते"" इति ।।"
"	This sloka says that in the case of a Bhakta who recites"
the names in accordance with the Sastric injunctions, there is the
attainment of all kinds of prosperity which comes as a matter
of course.
"	The person, who chants this Hymn with Zeal and devotion,"
becomes blessed with happiness of the self, forbearance, riches,
firmness of mind, good memory and great fame.
"	Sraddha means eagerness associated with respect. Bhakti"
has been already explained. Atma is the Self. Devotion to Bha-
gavan is the result of highly meritorious acts. There is nothing
good which is superior to Devotion to Lord Govinda.

तत्त्वतः एते दोषाः स्वभावत एव निवर्तन्ते इत्याह - न क्रोधः इति ।।
न क्रोधो न च मात्सर्यं न लोभो नाशुभा मतिः ।
भवन्ति कृतपुण्यानां भक्तानां पुरुषोत्तमे ।। 13 ।।
"	Neither anger nor jealousy, neither greed nor evil thoughts"
haunt the minds of those people who are true devotees of Purush-
ottama, (the Supreme Being) and who have acquired merit by
virtuous deeds.

न अयं फलार्थवादः शंक्यः निर्भाग्यैः कुतार्किकैः, भगवत्प्रभावस्य असंभाव्याभावेन
अतिवाद-अपवादयोः असंभवात् इति अभिप्रयन्, तस्य तं प्रभावमाह - द्यौः सचन्द्र इति ।।
द्यौः सचन्द्रार्कनक्षत्रा खं दिशो भूर्महोदधिः ।
वासुदेवस्य वीर्येण विधृतानि महात्मनः ।। 14 ।।
"विधृतानि इति नानालिङ्गानां - ""नपुंसकमनपुंसकेन एकवच्चास्य अन्यतरस्याम्"""
(अष्टा. 1.2.69) इति नपुंसकलिङ्गशेषता ।।
"	There may be some who, because of their misfortune, indulge"
in illogical reasoning and are incredulous of the truth of the statement
about the fruits. Their view is not correct, because there is nothing
unbelievable in the power and greatness of the Lord. There is no
exaggeration or false praise here. That greatness of Bhagavan is des-
cribed as follows.
"	The firmament, along with the moon, the sun and the stars, the"
sky, the directions, Earth and the Great sea - all, all are supported by
the valour of Vasudeva, the Supreme Lord.
"	The word vidhrtaani in the sloka is in the neuter gender."
Though there are other words in it in other genders, the participle
form of the verb is put in the neuter gender according to the
following rule.
"	A neuter noun. which has the same form only differing in"
affix, is optionally retained and the other is dropped and it is like
a singular number. (i.e. where one adjective qualifies several words
in different genders, but one of which must be neuter, the adjective
agrees with the neuter.)

सर्वस्य तच्छक्ति-विधृतत्त्वम् उक्त्वा तद्वशवर्तित्वम् आह - ससुरासुर इति ।
ससुरासुरगन्धर्वं सयक्षोरगराक्षसम् ।
जगद्वशे वर्ततेदं कृष्णस्य सचराचरम् ।। 15 ।।
वर्ततेदम् इति आर्षीसंहिता । अवर्तत इदम् इति वा ।।
"	After having said that all things are supported by the"
power of Bhagavan, it is next stated that all of them are under
His control.
"	This world along with all the sentient and non-sentient"
objects, with Gods Asuras and Gandharvas as well as Yakshas,
serpents and Rakshasas is under the control of Sri Krishna.
"	The joining of the two words vartate and idam in a"
compound as vartatedam is archaic; according to the grammatical
rule the form of the compound should be 'vartata idam'. Or the
words may be taken as 'avartatedam' (meaning this was).

इदं तद्वशवर्तित्वं शरीरात्मभावेन विशिनष्टि - इन्द्रियाणि इति ।
इन्द्रियाणि मनो बुद्धिः सत्त्वं तेजो बलं धृतिः ।
वासुदेवात्मकान्याहुः क्षेत्रं क्षेत्रज्ञमेव च ।। 16 ।।
वासुदेवात्मकानि तच्छरीराणि इत्यर्थः । आहुः शास्त्राणि इति शेषः ।।
"	This state of all things being under the control of Vasudeva"
is particularised as the body-soul relationship between all objects
and Bhagavan by this sloka.
"	Vaasudeva-aatmakaani - It means that all of them are His"
bodies. The word Sastras is to be supplied as the subject of the
predicate aahuh (say).
"	The sense-organs, mind, intellect (the quality of) Sattva,"
power, strength, firmness, as well as the body and the individual
soul - all of them have Vasudeva as their Atma or the Inner Soul.
So do they state.

एवं तत्त्वशास्त्रार्थानां तादधीन्यम् अभिधाय, अनुष्ठानशास्त्रार्थानामपि तादधीन्यं
मन्दाधिकारिणां भयम् अपनेतुम् आह - सर्वागमानाम् इति ।।
सर्वागमानामाचारः प्रथमं परिकल्पितः ।
चारप्रथमो धर्मो धर्मस्य प्रभुरच्युतः ।। 17 ।।
सर्वागमानाम् - सर्वधर्मप्रमाणानां, प्रथमं परिकल्पितः - प्रथमप्रतिपाद्यधर्मः, आचारः -
शौचादिः । तदङ्गः श्रौतो धर्मः इति । तस्य आराध्यः फलदः सहायश्च अच्युतः इति ।।
"	After having propounded that all Sastras dealing with the"
Tattvas (realities) are under the control of Bhagavan, it is next
stated that all the Sastras laying down the injunctions for the practice
of rites etc, also are under His control. This is done with a view to
allay the fears of less learned men.
"	Right conduct has been laid down as the most important of"
and the foremost of all the Dharmas revealed by the Sastras (the valid
and authoritative texts) Right conduct gives rise to Dharma and
Achyuta Bhagavan is the Lord of all that Dharma.
"	Sarva-aagamaanaam - Of all the Sastras which are the"
authority for all Dharmas. Prathamam pari-kalpitah - the first Dharma
that is taught. Achyuta is the Deity Who is to be propitiated by that
Dharma, who is the Giver of the fruits, and who is also the helper in
the successful observance of that conduct.

धर्मानुबन्धिनामपि तदुद्भवत्वम् आह - ऋषयः इति ।
ऋषयः पितरो देवा महाभूतानि धातवः ।
जङ्गमाजङ्गमं चेदं जगन्नारायणोद्भवम् ।। 18 ।।
ऋषयः - मन्वादयः, तस्य स्मर्तारः अनुष्ठातारश्च । पितरो देवाः च अवान्तर-
आराध्याः । महाभूतानि - वियदादीनि । धातवः - तत्कार्याणि त्वक्चर्मादीनि ।
एतानि धर्मफलभोगोपकरणानि । भोक्तृवर्गः जङ्गमाजङ्गमं जगत् इति ।।
"	This sloka states that all things conneted with Dharma have"
their origin in the Lord.
"	The Sages, Pitrs (departed ancestors), gods, the great"
elements, and their effects, the moving and the non-moving objects
that comprise the entire Universe - all have come out of Narayana.
"	Rishis - Manu and other. They are the writers of the Smrities"
and also those who practise them. pitarah, Devaah the Manes and
gods are the subsidiary divinities to be worshipped. Mahaa-bhootaani -
Ether and the other (four elements.) Dhaatavah - skin hide etc. which
are products of the enjoyment of the fruit of Dharma. Jangama
-ajangamam Jagat - The moving and non-moving world of being
who enjoy the fruit.
ज्ञानहेतुतामपि आह - योगज्ञानम् इति ।।
योगो ज्ञानं तथा सांख्यं विद्याः शिल्पादिकर्म च ।
वेदाः शास्त्राणि विज्ञानमेतत्सर्वं जनार्दनात् ।। 19 ।।
ज्ञानम् - शास्त्रम् । योगस्य ज्ञानम् । योगो द्विविधः - 1.समाधियोगः 2.कर्मयोगश्च
इति । संख्यया तत्त्वानाम् अवधारणं सांख्यम् । विद्याः - व्याकरणादि अङ्गविद्याः,
धनुर्-आयुर्-गान्धर्वप्रभृतीनि दृष्टार्थानि उपविद्याः, शिल्पानि, सर्वत्र अनुष्ठेयं कर्म ।
वेदाः - प्रधानविद्याः । शास्त्राणि - स्मृति-इतिहास-पुराणानि । सर्वमेतत् विज्ञानं -
शास्त्रं, जनार्दनात् उद्भवति इति शेषः ।।
"	This sloka states that Bhagavan is the source of all Knowledge."
"	The knowledge of Yoga, Saankhya, several branches of learning,"
arts, works, Vedas and Sastras - a knowledge of all these springs
"from Bhagavan Janardana.	"
"	Jnaanam is Sastram. Yoga is of two kinds - Samaadhi Yoga and"
Karma-yoga  (i.e.. the course of Bhakti and that of Karma (action).
Saankhyam is that science by which the true nature of the Realities
is arrived at by means of sankhyaa (i.e. intellect). Vidyaah - the
subsidiary branches of knowledge like Grammar etc. Archery,
Medicine, Gaandharva (i.e music, dancing etc.) are practical sciences
which come under the class of Auxiliary Sciences. Silpas -
(Sculpture, Architecture etc.) Karma is observance of duties in all
places. Vedas - the foremost amongst all Sciences. Sastra - Smriti,
Itihasa and Purana. Sarvam etat vijnaanam - is Sastra. All these
sciences are born of Bhagavan Janardana. The predicate 'are
born' is to be supplied.
अनया महाविभूतिवैचित्र्या भगवतो महानिर्वाहं दर्शयति - एको विष्णुः इति ।।
एको विष्णुर्महद्भूतं पृथग्भूतान्यनेकशः ।
त्रीन्लोकान् व्याप्य भूतात्मा भुङ्क्ते विश्वभुगव्ययः ।। 20 ।।
स्वयम् एकः सन्, अनेकशः - असंख्येयतया रूप-प्रकार-परिणाम-प्रयोजनभेदेन
पृथक् च स्थितानि महान्ति भूतानि, त्रीन् लोकान् च - बद्ध-मुक्त-नित्यान् चेतनान्,
व्याप्य, तेषां नियम-शेषित्वादिभिः आत्मा भवन्, विश्वभुक् - सर्वथा परिपालकः,
तथाऽपि अव्ययः -तद्दोषैः अपरामृष्टः, पुनश्च परविभूत्या (तानि भूतानि)
महद्भूतम् - अवाङ्मनस-गोचरश्च भवन्, भुंक्ते - लीलाभोगरसम् अनुभवति इति ।।
"	By describing the great possessions, that sloka shows the"
sublime ruling power of Bhagavan.
"	Vishnu is the unique and unparallelled Deity in that He"
pervades the great elements of different kinds and the three
worlds (of souls). He is their Atma (the Inner Soul) and their
Protector. He stands far above all of them and is not touched by
their defects. Thus He enjoys supreme Bliss.
"	Ekah -Vishnu is unique. Anekasah - The great Elements"
which are of countless forms, manners, mutations and utility and
which are distinct and different from one another (prthak). He
pervades all of them and also the three worlds. Souls in bondage,
Released Souls and Eternal Angels are the three worlds here. He
is their Atma, because He controls them and is their Master. He is
their sole Protector. But He is Avyaya, not touched by their
defects. By his supreme glory, He is Mahat-bhootam. He is beyond
the region of thought and word, and Bhunkte - enjoys Leelaa-rasa
and bhoga rasa (the pleasure of sport and Divine Bliss).

निस्सीमभूमा भगवान् स्तुत्यः, तन्निगरण-क्षम-वाग्विभवो भगवान् व्यासः, तदुभय-
माङ्गल्य-महिमा इदं स्तवरत्नम्, तदपनेय- महादारिद्र्यम् इदं जगत् तदधिकारी इति
पुष्कलम् । एतत् यः कश्चित् चेतनः परावरश्रेयोर्थी निर्विशंकः सेवताम् इत्याह - इमं स्तवम् इति ।।
इमं स्तवं भगवतो विष्णोर्व्यासेन कीर्तितम् ।
पठेद्य इच्छेत्पुरुषः श्रेयः प्राप्तुं सुखानि च ।। 21 ।।
"	Here Bhagavan, possessed of unlimited greatness is the"
object of praise. Bhagavan Vyasa, who has the wealth of words
enough to swallow and describe that, is the panegyrist. This gem
of a Hymn has the auspiciousness and the greatness of both of them.
This world, possessed as it is of great destitution, which is to be
removed by that Hymn is eminently qualified to take to it. Thus
everything is perfect and complete about this. Therefore any person,
desirous of supreme bliss or material pleasures, whoever he may be,
may resort to it. This is stated by the following sloka.
"	That person, who desires to obtain supreme bliss and the"
pleasures of the world, should read this Stotra of Bhagavan Vishnu
sung by the great sage Vyaasa.
एवं स्वभावत एव समस्त-द्वन्द्व-प्रतिद्वन्द्व-सकलकल्याण-गुणाकरं प्रपन्न-पारिजातं
पुण्डरीकाक्षं लक्ष्मीपतिं भगवन्तं भजमानानां स एव सर्वस्वम् इति, तत्संपदो वाचाम्
अगोचराः । कुतः सांसारिक-परिभव-प्रसङ्गः इति पर्याप्तयति - विश्वेश्वरम् इति ।।
विश्वेश्वरमजं देवं जगतः प्रभवाप्ययम् ।
भजन्ति ये पुष्कराक्षं न ते यान्ति पराभवम् ।। 22 ।।
न ते यान्ति पराभवम् ओं नम इति ।
तमिमम् अर्थं शपथेन भावयन्, न ते यान्ति पराभवं न ते यान्ति पराभवम् इति आवृत्त्या
पूरयति इति ।।
"	Bhagavan Narayana, Who is the Consort of Lakshmi and the"
Lotus-eyed Lord is by nature opposed to all kinds of unwelcome
things (like happiness and sorrow, good and evil) and is the mine of
all auspicious qualities. He is like the celestial Parijata Tree for those
who hae resorted to Him. They consider that he alone is their wealth.
Therefore the riches and well-being of those people are beyond words.
This being the case, where is or them any
occasion for dishonour or disgrace. ? With these words Sage Vyasa
concludes the Hymn as follows:
"	The lotus-eyed Lord is the Birthless Supreme Deity, the ruler"
of the Universe and the Cause of the creation and destruction of the
Universe. Those who sing His praise will never meet with disrespect
or discomfiture of any kind.
"	Never will they meet with disrespect or discomfiture"
"	Salutations to that Lord of all auspiciousness."
"	""Never do they meet with any disrespect"", ""Never do they"
"meet with any disrespect"" - by repeating these words twice, the Sage"
swears on an oath and concludes the Hymn.

इति श्रीमन्महाभारते शतसहस्रिकायां संहितायां वैयासिक्यामानुशासनिकपर्वणि
श्रीभीष्मयुधिष्ठिरसंवादे एकोनपंचाशदधिकशततमः श्रीविष्णुसहस्रनामस्तोत्राध्यायः
समाप्तः ।। ओं तत् सत् ।।

अस्माकम् अत्र च परत्र च सर्वदुःखम् उन्मूल्य संपदम् अशेषविधां विधाय ।
श्रीरङ्गराजमहिषी स च वैष्णवानाम् सङ्गात् सुखं सह जयेन सदा क्रियास्ताम् ।।
"	May Sri Ranganayaki, the Queen Consort of Sri Rangaraja"
and Sri Rangaraja, both of them root out all our distress here and
hereafter, confer wealth of all kinds on us, and always bless us
through the company of devoted Sri Vaishnavas happiness and
victory.

इति श्रीहारीतकुलतिलकश्रीवत्साङ्कमिश्रसूनोः श्रीरङ्गराजदिव्याज्ञालब्ध
श्रीपराशरभट्टापरनामधेयस्य श्रीरंगनाथस्य कृतौ श्रीमद्विष्णुसहस्रनामविवरणं
भगवद्गुणदर्पणाख्यं भाष्यं समाप्तम् ।।
श्रीकृष्णार्पणमस्तु ।।
Thus concludes The commentary called Sri Bhagavad-Guna-
Darpana explaining the Thousand Names of Lord Sri Vishnu,
written by Sri Ranganatha who is the shining star of Harita race,
who is the son of Sri Vatsanka Misra and on whom was conferred
the name of Parasara Bhatta by the divine command of
Sri Ranganatha.