*301
 युगादिकृत् The creator of the beginning of the Yuga.
	Next the limitless nature of भगवान्  is dealt with. Amongst His 
Incarnations that in which He reclines on the leaf of a banyan tree 
(वट-पत्र-शायी अवतार ) is given as an example. Even at the end 
of a Yuga, He makes the beginning of another  युगादिकृत् . Even at 
the periodical dissolution of the Universe. He saved it from the distress 
of Deluge and began the Universe again.
*302
 युगावर्तो  He Who revolves the aeons. 
	He makes the Krutha and other युगा-s go round again and again 
associated with their respective धर्मा-s. He is युगावर्तो.
*303
 नैकमायः  He of multifarious wonders.
	भगवान्  is नैकमायाः by virtue of the innumerable, inscrutable 
and wonderful exploits of His like being an artless and charming infant, 
swallowing unlimited number of worlds and lying on the leaf of a banyan 
tree unsupported in the waters of the Ocean. The word 'माया' here is not 
used in the sense of illusion; because its usage in the sense of 'truth' 
also is found in many places. Vide :
	"Know that माया is Prakruthi". Here Prakruthi signifies the 
Primordial Matter which is the source for the creation of many objects.
	"माया, Vayunam, ज्ञानम् "all signify knowledge.
	"Thou knowest all the means for realising the fourfold ends of life." 
In all these places the word "माया  is used in the sense of knowledge. 
In विष्णु पुराण  it is used to signify a real substance that cannot be 
dispelled by correct knowledge and which is destroyed by means of arrows. 
Vide :
	"Thousands of that माया  of Sambara Asura were destroyed one by one
by the swift-moving discus (of विष्णु (which came to protect the body of 
the boy (प्रह्लाद)", (If the word 'माय' here means 'illusion', it could 
have been destroyed only by correct knowledge and not by the discus as 
stated here).
	In the Chapter on the माया in the वराह पुराण माया' is used in 
the sense of the wonderful exploits of विष्णु .
	"The appearance of the cloud, the return of the waves of the ocean 
(after touching the shore), the waxing and waning of the Moon, the blasts
of wind, the flash of the lightning, the movement of the hot-rayed sunall
these are the various wonderful acts (माया-s) of विष्णु."
	Learned men have explained 'माया' as 'great wonder'.
	Sage मार्कणडेय  describes in the अरण्य पर्व   (of महाभारत) the
marvellous act of विष्णु when he sees Him lying on the leaf of a banyan 
tree and says :
	"O King! I was struck with great wonder when I saw the entire world 
(in the belly of विष्णु)."ॏॏॏ
	"After speaking a few words thus, the highly wonderful God 
disappeared, O, the foremost of the भारता-s! How marvellous it is!".
	Thus with reference to the word 'माया' there is an abundance of 
usage in well-known and faultless texts in the sense of 'highly wonderful'.
*304
 महाशनः He who is a voracioud eater.
	He is महासना , because He swallows the entire Universe. Vide
	"Whatever moving and non-moving objects were seen by me in the 
world, I saw all of them in the belly of that great भगवान् ."
*305
 अदृश्यः He who cannot be seen. 
	The actions of भगवान्  are really unscrutable. Vide :
	"When the entire world has met with destruction, where and how 
does this infant lie? Even though I try to know this by the power of
 my austerities, I am not able to understand this infant."
	"After verbs having a penultimate short 'ri' the affix 'kyap' is 
employed with the exception of the two roots 'klip' and 'chrith'."
*306
व्यक्तरूपः  He of manifest form.
He who has the form that appears to His devotees.
*307
सहस्रजित् The conqueror of thousands of aeons.
 He who wins  over through युगा-s  being in the lying posture.
*308
 अनन्तजित् He who sines with a boundless form.
 He who has the ability to remain unknown,  though He is in His tiniest 
form.
*309
 इष्टः   He who is liked. 
	भगवान्  is इष्टः  since He is uniformly liked even by great persons 
borne by Him in His belly like a mother (who is liked by the infant)."
*310
 अविशिष्टः He in Whose attitude towards others, there is no difference.
*311
 शिष्टेष्टः  He who is dear even to eminent persons.
	He is dear even to मार्कण्डेय  and other persons of great wisdom as 
the Supreme Goal शिष्टेष्टः.
	In the same (महाभारत) :
	"Brahmins, who have the Saththva-गुणा in a great degree, who are 
bereft of egotism and who are always endowed with spiritual knowledge, 
ever think of Me and meditate upon Me."
*312
 शिखण्डी  He who has the plume of lordship. 
	भगवान्  is endowed with an effulgence signifying His limitless and 
unassilable lordship. So He is called शिखण्डी . Vide :
	"I see that Lion amongst men seated who has unlimited brilliance."
	The affix 'ini' has been added to the word 'sikhanda' to signify 
superiority by the possession of a noble quality.
*313
 नहुषः He who binds. Bhagavan binds the Jivas by His Maya.
	भगवान्  binds the जीवा-s by His माया . The etymologists intarpret 
the word thus : 'nahyathi (binds) ithi नहुषः'.
	"In that, another being (viz. जीव ) is bound down by माया  (the 
Primordial Matter)."
*314
 वृषः He Who drenches.
The selfsame Lord, by His nectar-like effulgence and words, Drenches him who is fatigued 
by wandering in the midst of the sea (of संसार ) and consoles him. So He is called Vrushah.
	'Vrushah' is derived from the root 'vrush' (to drench).
	"Then the child that was endowed with lotus-like eyes and effulgence and who was 
adorned by the श्रीवत्स (mark on His chest) spoke to me these words sweet to the 
ear : 'I know that you are very tired and you want to take rest'."
*315
 क्रोधहा He who gave up His anger. At the mere request of Kasyapa,
He gave up His anger which brought about the destruction of the 
kshatriya twenty one times. So he is called 'Kridhaahaa'
*316
 क्रोधकृत् He who showed His anger.
	Before that He showed His wrath against them-क्रोधकृत् .
*317
 कर्ता He who cuts (slays)
	He was the slayer of  कार्त-वीर्य who was the cause of such anger. Vide :
	"He who made the Earth rid of all क्षत्रिया-s."
*318
 विश्वबाहुः He who has arms for the good of the world.
	भगवान्  has arms with which He removes the thorns (evildoers) for the good 	of the 
world. Hence He is विश्वभाहु .
*319
 र्महीधरः The Supporter of the world. By removing the burden of 
the world, He supports it. So He is maheedhara
*320
अच्युतः He who does not fall from his status.
"Even when Thou art born as one among Brahma, Indra, Varuण and others who are subject 
to birth and loss of position, Thou dost not fall from Thy status. Therefore Thou art Achyutha."
	Though Thou takest birth possessed of qualities similar to those of Brahma and others. 
Thou art distinguished by the quality of not losing Thy overlordship. So Thou art Achyutha.
*321
 प्रथितः He of great reputation.
	"He has indeed great reputatuion." 
	"He is the sole receptacle for all fame."
*322
 प्राणः The life-breath, Bhagavan is Praana for those who resort him.
भगवान्  is the very life-breath (प्राण) of those who resort to Him.
	"Indeed I am the प्राण and the Ominscient Self. Worship and meditate on Me as life, as immortality."
	"He is the Nectar of the goods and the life-breath of all beings."
	"That which is denoted by प्राण (life) (Indra and other such words is Brahman) because 
it is so understood from the sequel."
*323
 प्राणदो The life Giver.
Next the Incarnation of भगवान्  as कूर्म  (Tortoise) is indicated.
	He is the bestower of strength (प्राणदः ) to the gods to enable them to churn the Milky Ocean.
	The Manthra for meditation on Him reads :
	"To Him Who is endowed with unlimited strength and power."
*324
 वासवानुजः The younger brother of Vasava i.e Indra.
Bhagavँn was born as the younger brother of Indra (वासव-अनुजः ) in order to help 
him to get the nectar which he wished to have.
	"The affix 'da' comes after the verb 'jan' (to be born) with a past signification 
when the root takes the preposition 'anu' and is compounded with a word in the Accusative 
Case." (वासवम् अनु जातः =वासवानुजः ).
*325
 अपां निधिः The sustainer of the waters of the great Ocean.
भगवान्  is अपां निधिः, because He sustained the great Ocean when it was being churned.
*326
 अधिष्ठानम् The support.
"O Great Sage!  He was the support for the Mandara mountain when it was revolving 
(at the time of churning)."
	So He is called अधिष्ठानम् .
*327
 अप्रमत्तः The Vigilant. 
He is extremely careful and attentive (अप्रमत्त) in the protection of those who are in distress.
*328
 प्रतिष्ठितः He who is self-dependent. 
He depends on His own greatness without looking for help from others. So He is प्रतिष्ठितः
	To the question "Where is भगवान्  firmly established?", the reply is "In His own greatness".
	"The Lord Who rests on His own greatness."
*329
 स्कन्दः He Who dries up i.e dstroys. He himself destroys the 
Asuras and other evil doers. So He is  स्कन्दः 
*330
 स्कन्दधरः The Supporter of स्कन्दः 
	भगवान्  is the supporter of स्कन्द, the Commander-in-chief of the army of 	gods. 
Skanda also is a part of His विभूति  (or glory). Vide :
	"I am Skanda among the commanders of armies."
*331
 धुर्यो The Chief or prop. 
	भगवान्  is the support as the मन्त्र  says :
	"Unto Him Who bears the world". So He is धुर्यो
	"The affixes 'yath' and 'dhak' come in the sense of 'what bears it after the word 
	'dhura' in the second case in construction.
*332
 वरदः The Grantor of boons. He is वरदः, because He bestows the 
       required boons on the gods and others who have got to carry on the 
	 affairs of the world.
*333
 वायुवाहनः He who has vayu as his vehicle. 
भगवान्  rides on and drives वायु (Air) who is the life-breath of the world. So He is वायुवाहनः 
*334
 वासुदेवः He who pervades and sports.
भगवान्  is 'वासुः ' and ' देवः '. He is वासु since He lives in the world making it live within 
Himself like a mother and also protects it by covering it like a bird that protects 
its young ones with its out-spread wings. (The word 'वासुः' is derived from the root 
'vas' (to reside and to envelope). He is 'देवः ', because He plays, wishes to conquer, 
and again shines; He is eulogised and goes (to His devotees).
	(The root 'div' from which the word 'deva' is derived has got several meanings-to 
sport, wish to conquer, to shine, to praise, to feel happy, to dream, to glitter and to go.)
	The ancient seers have interpreted the name वासुदेव thus :
	"Like the Sun that covers the entire world with his rays. I also cover the world 
and I am the abode of all beings. So I am called वासुदेव."
	"I am the abode of all beings and with a divine form live in all of them. 
Therefore I am known as वासुदेव and am referred to as such."
	"Learned men declare that भगवान्  is called वासुदेव, because He abides in all things 
and all things abide in Him."
	Such is the statement in all शास्त्रा-s about Him. We do not write anything more 
explicitly since it is a secret (and has to be learnt from a preceptor).
*335
 बृहद्भानुः He of profuse lustre.
	With a desire to explain further the sage proceeds to say :
	The name बृहद्भानुः signifies that He shines by virtue of His world of Enjoyment. 
He has eternal and radiant rays.
*336
 अदिदेवः The First Deity.
That He sports with the worlds that are inferior to Him is described by the name अदिदेवः. Vide
	"भगवान् , the Lord, plays with the world creating and destroying it as He pleases."
	"भगवान्  is inscrutable. He cannot be commanded by any one. He can go wherever He 
likes. He has all under His control. Like a child playing with its toys, He plays 
with the beings in the world (and enjoys the लीला )."
*337
 पुरन्दरः The destroyer of cities.
By the four names beginning with this, the warding off of troubles caused by wicked 
persons by भगवान्  is described. He is Purandara, because He destroyed the cities 
of the Asurँs. This indicates the removal of the fear from the असुरा, पिशाचास्  (i.e. 
ghosts), thunder and lightning, planets and other troubles which go by the name of 
'आदि-दैविक ' (those that proceed from the gods).
	"The words 'वाचंयम' and 'पुरन्दर ' are irregularly formed.
*338
 अशोकः The dispeller of sorrows. 
He is the remover of sorrow, delusion, hunger and other bodily troubles of all beings-the 
troubles which go by the name of 'अध्यात्मिक '. So He is अशोक.
*339
 तारणः  He who takes othesr to the other shore
	He rescues (तारण ) all from the fears of enemies, thieves, diseases and other 	such 
things which are known as 'आधिभौतिक'. 
*340
 तारः The Saviour. Bhagavan is called Taarah, because by his very
      presence He saves all from the fears of Samsara.
भगवान्  is called तारः , because by His very presence He saves all from the fears of संसार .
	In अथर्व शिर-s the Manthra is : "He makes all cross over the great fears of the 
sea of संसार  comprising conception, birth, old age and death. Therefore He is called 'Thँra'."
	"He is devoid of sins, and bereft of old age and death." This and other such Vedic 
texts are appropriate to the context.
*341
 शूरः The Valiant. 
By the name 'शूरः' the quality of having a desire for victory is signified. He is 'डःra' 
because he is capable of attaining victory.
	The word 'शूरः' is derived from the root 'शु' (to go).
	"The affix 'kran' comes after 'su', 'si', 'chi', and 'mi' and there is also the 
lengthening of the vowel of the root. (शु+u+ra=शुर.)
*342
 शौरिः The son of Soora (Vasudeva). 
शौरिः indicates that special quality because of which He goes toward s His devotees. 
He is the son of the valiant वासुदेव .
	"The affix 'इञ्' comes after a norminal stem which ends in short 'a' in denoting a descendant."
*343
जनेश्वरः The Lord of the people. 
He has a great flood of over-flowing lordship which submerges all and shines brilliantly. So He is जनेश्वरः 
*344
 अनुकूलः He who is within bounds. 
By virtue of His greatness He is devoid of wonder, conceit and haughtiness and does 
not transgress the limits of lordship.  अनुकूलः means He remains within bounds. Vide :
	"रामा has great valour, but He is not struck with wonder at such great valour."
	Or  अनुकूल means He is slave towards His devotees. Vide :
	"The only support for the Prapanna is the hand of the Lord जनार्दन  Who has been 
bought, as it were, by Bhakthi (devotion)."
	"O highly mischievous child! Make Thyself free, if Thoucanst."-(are the words of 
 यशोद  to कृष्ण ). And so on.
*345
 शतावर्तः He of a hundred whirlpools. 
By the word 'आवर्ता ' (whirlpool) the over-flowing riches of the Lord are signified. 
The riches-though unlimited, are kept within bounds without over-flowing by His easy 
accessibility and appear like whirlpools of a stream when it flows through a narrow 
gorge and comes out.
	By this the Manthra of the Para-aspect of the Lord is corroborated which reads thus :
	"Unto Him of tranquil and ever-growing knowledge and life."
*346
 पद्मी He who has lotus. He is invariably having a lotus with Him
for sport . So He is called पद्मी.
*347
पद्मनिभेक्षणः He of lotus like glance. He has glances which 
	dispel the  afflictions of His devotees and which are like the 
	pure and gently moving lotuses.
*348
 पद्मनाभः He who has a lotus like navel.
	He is पद्मनाभः . He has a lotus-like navel also.
*349
 अरविन्दाक्षः The Lotus eyed. 
He has two eyes lovely like the lotus.
*350
 पद्मगर्भः  He who is installed in a lotus
He is meditated upon as being seated on a lotus replete with fragrance and delicacy 
suited to Him; or Who has been installed inside the heart-lotus of His worshippers. 
So He is called Padma-garbha. Vide :
	"That lotus (namely the heart), which is subtle, flawless, and which is the seat 
of the Supreme Being."
	"The subtle lotus is His abode."
	"He who has taken His place on the lotus-seat." And so on.
*351
 शरीरभृत्  The Protector of His Body i.e Devotees
With such an auspicious and enchanting body, भगवान्  nourishes the meditator whom 
He considers and His own body. The nourishment and protection of such meditators 
is achieved only by means of His qualities which are being meditated upon by them 
with love and devotion.
	"When the eternal भगवान्  abides in the heart of a person, the body of the latter 
becomes possessed of a great charm in this world."
	"O devout (disciple) I Your face shines like that of a person who has realised the Brahman."
	In fact a devotee is both like His Soul and like His body (in the eyes) of Bhagavँn. Vide :
	"Lord विष्णु  protects His devotees like His own soul and body."
*352
 महर्द्धिः He of immense riches. The same भगवान्  is next described
as being endowed riches. He has boundless riches which are sufficient to bring
about the well-being and protection of His devotees.
*353
 ऋद्धः The Prosperous. 
	भगवान्  thinks that He is prosperous (Ruddhah) only when His devotees are prosperous. Vide :
	"Having crowned (विभीषण ) as the King of Lanka. (रामा became free from fever and 
felt extremely happy, What a highly noble quality!)".
*354
 वृद्धात्मा He of full-grown nature. 
He is वृद्धात्मा, because His essential nature is so great that it contains within 
itself even this supreme greatness of the qualities.
*355
 महाक्षः He with a vehicle of powerful axle.
	(अक्ष  literally means the axlea part of a chraiot. Here it is 
used to denote the chariot itself by a figure of speech known as Synecdoche 
(part put for the whole). So the word अक्ष in this name signifies a vehicle.)
महाक्षः means भगवान्  Who has a vehicle which is ' महान् ' worthy of
reverence. भगवान्  has for His vehicle Garuda who is said to be 
the very embodiment of the वेदा-s. Garuda serves as a vehicle for 
Bhagavँn Who is therefore called Garuda-वाहन . 
*356
 गरुडध्वजः garuda bannered. 
	भगवान्  is called Garuda-dhvaja since Garuda himself is 
the banner for भगवान् . That again is the unique symbol of भगवान् .
*357
 अतुलः The Incomaprable
	Vide :
	"He has no equal".
*358
 शरभः The destroyer. 
	भगवान्  destroys those who transgress the bounds (of ethics).
	"The affix 'abhach' comes after the roots 'kri', 'श्रि', 'sal', 
'kal' and 'gard'." ('श्रि'+'abhach'=sarabha.)
*359
 भीमः The Formidable. He is Bheema; therefore they are afraid of
       Him.
	He is भीम ; therefore they are afraid of Him.
	"The affix 'mak' comes after the root 'भी' (to fear) with the 
optional augment 'षुक्'. (Hence the words 'भीम', 'भीष' and 'भीष्म '.)
	"The words भीम ' and others are irregularly formed and govern a 
noun in the Ablative case."
	Out of fear from Him, वायु  (the god of wind) and others do not 
transgress their bounds. Vide :
	"Out of fear from Him does the wind blow."
	"The entire world with everything in it which is existent in 
प्राण  and which has proceeded there from, trembles on account of fear 
from Him, Who is like Vajra (the thunder-bold) up-lifted."
	"Only out of fear (from Him) the fire burns; the Sun blazes out 
of fear; out of fear Indra and वायु  discharge their duties; Death, as 
the fifth, runs (i.e. performs its duties)."
	"(He Who is of the size of the thumb is the Brahman;) on account 
of trembling at Him (the whole world does its duty)."
*360
 समयज्ञः The knower of the conventions.
	He is Samayajna, therefore He knows how the fire and other things 
should act; for example, the flame of the fire should go upwards.
	(Even after the period of deluge and at the beginning of creation) 
the Creator created the Sun and the Moon as before (and assigned their duties to them)."
	Or the name may be interpreted thus : He knows the proper time when 
He should offer Himself to the devotees; or when He should fulfil the vow of 
protection taken by Himself.
*361
 हविर्हरिः He Who takes the offerings.
	"For the meditator there is delay only till he is not freed (from the
 body); then he attains (Me)."
	भगवान्  knows the time laid down by the वेद  thus and bestows 
Himself on them and is also taken by them. So He is 'Havih'.
	The word 'havi' is derived from the root 'hu' (to give and also 
to take). "The affix 'isi' comes after the verbs 'arch' 'such', 'hu', 
'strip', 'chad' and 'chard'". ('hu'+'isi'=havih).
	The Name 'Hari' means that He removes the obstacles of the 
meditators. The word is derived from the verb 'harathi' (takes away) 
with the addition of the affix 'in'. This affix is added by the rule :
 "The affix 'in' comes after all roots."
	"Hari destroys all sins when He is remembered even by men with 
evil hearts. Even if fire is touched unawares, it certainly burns."
	Havir-Harih is one name.
	(The etymological meaning of the word 'Hari' is also given thus;)
	"I take my part of the oblations offered in sacrifices in houses; 
(hare=I take). The charming colour of my body is green. So I am known 
as Hari. (hari=green).
*362
 सर्वलक्षणः लक्षण्यः 
	He Who is appropriately distinguiढed by all symbols which define Him 
(as the Supreme Deity).
	भगवान् विष्णु as the Consort of लक्षमी is next dealt with.
	He is appropriately cognised by the knowledge which is characterised 
by the defining marks that proclaim His good fortune in having the constant
embrace of the Goddess लक्षमी (and being Her consort).
	 सर्वलक्षणः लक्षण्यःThose distinguishing marks are given in the 
following श्लोक :
	"One should meditate upon that Deity Who is the Consort of लक्षमी, 
Who has the splendour of the inner part of a lotus and Whose two hands 
are adorned by 'कमलालय' and हितेश ' (i.e. the lotus which is the 
abode of  लक्षमी and चक्र  which is the lord of all weapons)"
	And in His Manthra (He is portrayed as follows) : "O the Lotus 
eyed (Lord)! The Sea of Bliss and Good Fortune!" 
	"The affix 'yath' is added after a noun in the Locative Case in 
the sense of 'excellent in regard thereto'."
*363
 लक्ष्मीवान् He who ia always with lakshmi.He has the eternal 
comapnionship of lakshmi
	Therefore लक्ष्मीवान्  He has the eternal companionship of लक्ष्मी. Vide :
	"At the time of my marriage (with Lakढmi). I in a playful mood placed 
(before all) the 'Dvaya'-(the great secret that The Supreme Reality is a 
Couple, and not नारायण  alone, nor Lakढmi alone). Then I also revealed that like Myself 
लक्षमी  also is beginningless (i.e. eternal). This Prakruthi was embraced by My hands, 
and I by Her hands; wherefore I have resorted to Her and she, in Her turn has resorted 
to me. (So we are always together.)"
In this श्लोक , the word 'प्रकृति i' signifies लक्ष्मी, the Universal Mother.
*364
 समितिञ्जयः  Samitinjayah - The Victor in battles.
	भगवान्  is the Father of the Universe since, लक्ष्मी is its Mother
 and so He always does things to bring about the joy of all. He wins over 
the जीवा-s and dispels the distress caused by the conflict in their minds 
about their being the servants of the Lord.
	This is revealed by His Manthra : "The Conquer of all distress."
	"The affix 'khach' comes after the following roots when the words to 
be formed denote a name, 'bhri', 'thri', 'vri' and 'ji'." (Ji + Khach = 
Jayah).
*365
 विक्षरः He who never wanes. His love for the devotees, as 
described above never becomes less. So He is विक्षरः.
*366
रोहितः He Who is of red complexion. He is Rohita, because He has
 the red colour of the inside of a lotus.
*367
 मार्गः He is sought after. He is Maarga, because He is always
       sought after by His worshipers.
	He is मार्ग , because He is always sought after by His worshippers.
	And  this is His Manthra : "He Who bestows the frues desired."
*368
 हेतु The Cause. He is the cause for realisation of their desires.
	He is the cause for the realisation of their desires. He is हेतु.
	हेतु  is derived from the root 'hi' (to go).
	The affix 'thu' comes after the roots 'kam', 'man' 'hi' and others." (Hi+thu=हेतु).
*369
 दामोदरः He who has the worlds in His belly. He is Daamodara, because
the worlds are in His belly.
	He is दमोदर , because the worlds are in His belly.
	"Since, He has the strings in the form of worlds (दाम) within His bolly,
 He is known as दमोदर."
	"They know Him as दमोदर, because He has 'दाम' viz. Joy, 
indicating happiness for the gods."
	"He came to be known as दमोदर because of His being tied with a 
string (by यशोद)."
	Even though this skill of कृष्ण  was admired and loved by लक्ष्मी 
also, still when He was bound by यशोद, He shed tears (and did not free 
Himself) out of His love for the devoted mother).
*370
 सहः He who has patience.
	He is सहः, because He puts up with their binding Him with a string, 
threatening Him and chiding Him.
*371
 महीधरः The Supporter of the Earth.
	He protects and supports the Earth by removing its burden.
*372
 महाभागः The extreamely fortunate. 
	He (कृष्ण) has the good fortune of being voluntarily chosen as 
Consort by the cowherdess नील , sixteen thousand celestial damsels, 
रुक्मणि, सत्यभाम,जांबवति and others. So He is महाभागः.
*373
 वेगवान् He who is quick.
	Though He is in the stage of childhood exhibiting human qualities, 
still He is quick in manifesting His irresistible Supreme Sovereignty. 
He is वेगवान् .
	"The affix 'mathup' comes after a word in the sense of excelling 
in a quality."
*374
 अमिताशनः The voracious Eater. He swallowed all the unlimited 
quantity of food hoarded by the cowherds for the worship of Indra.
	How (does He manifest His greatness. अमितासनः. He swallowed 
all the unlimited quantity of food hoarded by the cowherds for the worship 
of Indra. The cowherds who saw it were struck with wonder and began to 
entertain doubts (if He was an ordinary human being) and asked Him : "Who 
are you, a देव  or an Asura (a god or a devil)?"
*375
 उद्भवः The Remover of the bondage. Damodara (who was bound by a
       string round his stomach) cuts the bondage of others.
	"दामोदर  (who was bound by a string around his stomach) cuts the 
bondage of others."
As stated in this श्लोक . He removes the bondage of संसार  of those 
who meditate upon Him as being bound by यशोदा . The bonds of the material 
world are cut by Him. So He is उद्भवः.
*376
 क्षोभणः The Creator of a commotion.
	He creates tumult in the minds of those others who are fit to be 
bound and in the Prakruthi (the Primordial Matter) which binds them 
(at the time of creation).
*377
 देवः He who diverts Himself. 
	He is देवः , because He binds the जीवा-s with the strings of माया 
(Prakruthi) and plays with them even as the hunters do with the tigers 
and boars in the forest.
*378
 श्रीगर्भः He who has Lakshmi always with Him
	लक्षमि  is His companion whem He entertains by always associating with 
Her in this kind of sport (in this world). Vide :
	"This (लक्षमि) is ever inseparable from विष्णु.".
*379
 परमेश्वरः The Supreme Ruler. 
His supreme rulership is made fruitful (by the protection of the world) 
as He got the voluntary embrace of लक्षमि. Vide :
"राम  shone very much with the beautiful सीत  just as the mighty 
विष्णु , the Lord of the gods does with लक्षमि."
*380
 करणं The Means. 
	भगवान्  is called करणम्  because He is the greatest means for 
attaining Him. Ear, eye and other organs which are the means of knowledge, 
hands, feet and others which are the instruments of action are called 
'करण' (i.e. means of instrument) because of their having a tiny 
particle of this power of भगवान् . Vide :
"The  eye and that which is seen is नारायण ; the ear and that which 
has to be heard is नारायण ".
	And also other texts like these.
*381
 कारणं He who causes others to act. 
	It is भगवान्  Who makes all endowed with those organs of sense and 
action do their respective acts.
*382
 कर्ता The agent. 
	He is the independent agent in all those acts. A जीव  or the 
individual soul, who has the right to do an act and reap its fruit, 
considers that the resulting pleasure or pain is his own. In the same 
manner or probably in a greater degree, भगवान्  regards the pleasure 
of the pain of the जीवा as His own.
	"When the subjects (of His kingdom) are in distress, श्री राम feels 
much more distressed; and in all their joys in festivities, He feels 
rejoiced like a father (at the joy of his child)."
	If the distress and joy of भगवान्  and of the जीव  were distinct 
and different, and if the joy and the sorrow of the जीव were not 
considered as His own by परमात्मा, then the Upanishadic text that the 
Brahman itself has become many will not be appropriate. For the 
Upanishad says that the Supreme Brahman willed "I shall become many; 
(for that) I shall take birth."
*383
 विकर्ता He Who is affected and undergoes modifications.
	Since, भगवान्  identifies Himself with all beings, their joys, 
sorrows etc., which are the fruit of their acts good and bad, are 
experienced by Him also as though they were His own and He undergoes 
mutations. So He is called विकर्ता. He has no joy or sorrow which 
results from His own act; and the experience of joy and sorrow is 
only for the sake of others. So it does not bring any discredit to 
भगवान् . Otherwise, how can such noble qualities be predicated of 
Him, qualities like feeling sorrowful at the sorrows of others?
*384
 गहनः  He who is deep and inscrutable. 
	He is गहनः (beyond the understanding of all) because of this 
magnificent quality of identifying Himself with the Individual souls 
and considering their knowledge, abode, enjoyment and instruments of 
enjoyment as His own and protecting them.
	"Though भगवान्  remains with them, the gods do not understand Him."
	"He Who remains in the Earth (but whom the Earth does not know)." 
The entire section of the अन्तर्यामि ब्रह्मणे  beginning with this Manthra 
is relevant to this idea.
	In the Subalopanishad : "नारायण is both the eye and the object to 
be seen."
	"The seat of action (i.e. the body) the agent, the different kinds 
of organs, the manifold and distinctively functioning vital airs 
(literally distinctive activities) and also Providence forming the 
fifth in this set  these five are the causes in respect of every act.".
*385
 गुहः The Saviour.
	In  this way He protects all (gu:dhathi) and hence Guhah.
*386
 व्यवसायः The pivot of the planets. 
	The circle of planets is closely fastended in Him.
*387
व्यवस्थानः The Basis for the division of time.
*388
 संस्थानः The final end.All things will have their ultimate 
	end in Bhagavan, whose name therefore is Samsthaanah.
*389
 स्थानदः The Giver of the Supreme abode.
	He alone is स्थानदः , (the Giver of the Abode) as the Manthra describes Him :
"Unto Him, the cause for the attainment of Paramapada 
(the Transcendental Abode by the जीवा-s)." 
*390
 ध्रुवः The Stationary. 
	He conferred a high place on ध्रुवः , who belonged to a later age and 
made him stationary. Hence He is Himself ध्रुवः. The truth about ध्रुवः  
is that He is all-pervasive.
*391
 परर्द्धिः  He of noble and auspicious qualities. 
	The abundance of the auspicious qualities in भगवान्  in His 
Incarnation as राम  is superior even to the Supreme Overlordship of 
सर्वेश्वर . Hence He is Parardhih. It is because of this that, even 
though रामा-'s status is very high, He is often compared with सोम 
and other gods who are of a lower rank. Vide :
	"In valour रामा  is similar to विष्णु ; He has a delightful appearance 
like the Moon."
	राम  is endowed with transcendent nature. (This is revealed by 
the words of Dasarattha addressed to लक्षमण ) :
	"Dear son (लक्षमण) : It has been declared (by Brahma and 
other gods) that this राम  is really the Supreme Brahmam incarnate. 
He cannot be realised by those who are bereft of devotion. He 
is immutable by nature. He is the inner Soul of all gods and a Mystery 
that can be known only by means of the उपनिषद्s. He is the conqueror 
of His enemies."
	"O King (Dasarattha) Many are the auspicious qualities, that are 
in your son, श्री राम." These are the words of the members of the 
Assembly summoned by Dasarattha for consulting them about Rama's 
coronation.
	"Unto भगवान् " is the phrase in the Manthra that pertains 
to Him, (i.e. श्री राम )
*392
 परमः स्पष्टः He whose greatness is explicit. He is Param-spashtha.
       His greatness can be clearly cognised by means of direct perception.
	He is Parama-स्पष्ट. His greatness can be clearly cognised by means 
of direct perception. Vide :
	"It is evident that Sri Rँma is 'महा-योग'He is ever immersed in 
the one great thought of the protection of the world. He is the Supreme 
Soul and eternally existent (without any mutations.)"
	"श्री राम  is the Sun even of the Sun."
*393
 तुष्टः He who was pleased. 
	He was much more pleased with the attainment of the state of being 
	the son of Dasarattha and being the protector of the world when the 
	entire humanity would have the right to approach Him for help than 
	with the state of Supreme Lordship which can be resorted to only by 
	those who have the necessary qualifications. Vide :
	"Then Bhagavँn chose Dasarattha as His father.".
	"राम  highly valued the Dharma (duty) of a क्षत्रिय quite in 
	consonance with the fact that He had taken birth in the race of 
	क्षत्रिय. "
	"I consider myself a human being राम  the son of Dasarattha"(these 
	are the words of राम  to the gods who appeared before Him).
*394
 पुष्टः He who is replete.
	 He is पुष्टः  replete with noble qualities like these. Vide :
	"Him Who was possessed of such noble qualities."
*395
 शुभेक्षणः The Auspicious eyed. 
	He has charming lotus-like eyes which are cool, large, magnanimous 
	and long which reveal His lordship and also His amiable nature.
	"He has beautiful eyebrows and long red eyes. He is indeed Bhagavँn 
	विष्णु Himself."	Or the word 'शुभेक्षण ' can be taken to signify : 
	to be the object that is seen or to be the agent who sees; both 
	were to His liking. Vide : "Whoever has not seen राम  or whomsoever 
	राम has not seen, that person stands condemned by all the people 
	in the world, and even his own self condemns him."
*396
रामः He who delights.
	He is राम, "because all are always delighted by Him being charmed by 
	His form and qualities". Vide :
	"राम  is the foremost among those who delight (the minds of 
	all people)."
	"राम , Who is fascinating by virtue of His qualities."
	"राम , the dark-hued and red-eyed youth, Who is majestic like 
	the best of elephants."
	"Like the Sun that shines with its rays, राम  shone brightly with 
	His qualities which charmed  the subjects of His kingdom and which 
	were a source of joy to His father."
	This is revealed, also by the Manthra about Him.
	"Unto Him Who has the splendour of the autumnal blue lily and a 
	lovely body."
*397
विरामः  He before Whom all become powerless. 
	He is विरामः, because before Him all become powerless-all, gods like 
	Brahma who grant the boons, रावण  and others who have acquired the 
	boons (by their austerities) and the boons themselves of being 
	indestructible even by death. Vide :
	"The four-faced and self-born Brahma (rudra, the three-eyed destroyer 
	of the three cities of gold, iron and silver, and Indra the great 
	chief of gods-no one can save that person whom राम has willed to 
	slay)."
*398
 विरतः The Unattached. 
	भगवान्  is विरतः, because of the spirit of detachment which is 
	natural to Him. He has no love for kingship and other trifles. Vide 
	"Even the loss of the kingdom did not deprive Him (राम) of His 
	splendour just as the night cannot take away the loveliness of 
	the cool-rayed moon."
	"The carrying out of the order of exile given by His father was 
	much more to His liking than even the coronation. Then He really 
	shone with splendour."
	"Even when श्री राम abandoned the kingdom under the plea of Dharma 
	(viz. Obeying father's words), and when He led me to the forest 
	where I had to move on foot, (there was neither disappointment nor 
	grief, nor fear in राम "सीता  says.)
	मार्गः  He Who is sought after.
	He is sought after even by sages like भरद्वाज.
	विराजो मार्गः  is another reading. 'विराजः' means dustless (i.e. 
	faultless); 'मार्गः ' signifies 'path'. The meaning is : 'The path 
	shown by श्री राम  is faultless.' Vide :
	"The goal of those who are in the habit of conducting sacrifices 
	as well as the goal of those who tend and worship the (five) fires, 
	(you will attain that goal by my command)." (These are the words of 
	श्री राम to जटायु .)
	"(The arrow discharged from the bow of श्री राम ) secured for वालि 
	the Supreme Goal."
*399
 नेयः   He Who is governed by his devotees. 
	He willingly heeds the commands of His friends; hence He is Neya. Vide :--
	"I am agreeable to be commanded by those who practise austerities."
	"I wish to have an abode in this forest here in a place allotted by you".
	"Though wise and capable by himself, a person desirous of permanent good 
	should, in times of difficulties, consult his good-hearted friends and 
	agree to be guided by them."
	In the सभा पर्व  (महाभारत), श्री कृष्ण  Himself says :
	"O युधिष्ठिर ! When I am here for doing what is good to you, 
	conduct the sacrifice (राज सूय यज्ञ) that you desire to do. 
	You may ask me to do whatever you want. I shall certainly carry 
	out your behests."
	Again in the उद्योग पर्व  (महाभारत ) :
	"O long-armed scion of the royal dynasty of Bharatha! I am here 
	ready to do whatever you want. I shall carry out your commands."
	(लक्षमण was struck by the weapon, Sakthi by name, and had fallen 
	down unconscious.) All the inimical राक्षसा-s joined together and 
	tried to lift and carry him away. They could not even move him. 
	But he was light to Hanuman (the son of वायु) who lifted him 
	single-handed because of the latters's love and devotion for him."
*400
 नयः He who draws towards Himself all. 
	He is Naya, because all the beings are drawn towards him by His 
	benevolent nature.The sages themselves said to राम 
	"We are to be protected by Thee always like children, even though 
	we are sages with penance as our treasure."
	"(O कृष्ण !) Thou art the protector of the पाण्डवा-s; so we also 
	resort to Thee for protection."
