*701
 वसुः The Dweller. 
	The Lord Who has His abode in the Milk-ocean and from whom 
all the incarnations proceed is mentioned by the name Vasu Vide
	"The great Lord resides in the Milk-ocean for doing good to 
the people of the world."
	"This नारायण  is always with लक्षमी, नारायण , Whose abode 
is the Milk-ocean. He has come to the city of मधुर  leaving His 
serpent-couch (आदिशेष )." And so on.
*702
वसुमना He whose mind is with Vasudeva.
	Even though He is residing in the Milk-ocean, the birth place 
of लक्षमी , His mind is always with Vasu (viz. वासुदेव ). (वसुमनाः ), 
Scholars in महाभाष्य  say that the word 'Vasu' denotes वासुदेव  even 
as the word 'दत्त ' is used to denote 'देवदत्त '. And भाम ' to 
denote 'सत्य भाम '.
*703
 हविः He  who was handed over.
	Even though कृष्ण  had a desire to be with देवकी  and वासुदेव , 
they entrusted Him to नन्दगोप  and यशोद  for protection from कंस . 
Their affection for Him was so great that even without any reason they 
were apprehensive that Kamsa might do Him harm.
*704
 सद्गतिः The Protector of the good.
	Immediately, after His birth He was the Protector of the good by 
removing the distress caused by the असुरा-s. Vide
	"The good, experienced great joy and the violent winds became calm."
*705
 सत्कृतिः He of loveable acts. 
	Even the innocent acts of His infacy and childhood were lovable since, 
they cut the fetters of the entire material world-acts like stealing the 
curd and butter, being tied to the mortar crawling on the knees, 
रास क्रीड (dance with the गोपी-s) etc. Vide
	"My birth and acts are all supernatural"
*706
सत्ता Exitance incarnate. 
	He is Himself सत्ता , the very existence etc. of the good and the 
plous and all other things also. There is indeed nothing that can exist 
without Him. Vide
	"Whatever exists (in this world. moving or unmoving) without Me it 
cannot have existence."
*707
 सद्भूतिः The wealth for the good.
	For the good people He is everything-the son, friend, kinsman, 
messenger, charioteer and all other things also. So He is सद् भूतीः.
*708
 सत्परायणः The Support for the good.
	"पाण्डवा-s have कृष्णा as their resort, कृष्णा  as their strength, 
and कृष्णा as their saviour. In short, कृष्णा  is their great support."
	So, He is Sath परायण . He Himself said so
	"You will certainly attain Me."
	If   'सत्-परायणम् ' is the reading , then the word is in the 
Neuter gender. If 'सत्-परायणः is the reading. then the word will 
be in the masculine gender and it should be interpreted as follows: the 
good people themselves are the highest resort for Him. Vide
	"The पाण्डवा-s are verily My life-breath."
	"Thou art they Protector of the पाण्डवा-s  and we have taken resort 
to Thee."
	"But it is My view that the wise men are My inner soul."
*709
 शूरसेनः He with a valiant army. 
	The यादवा-s and the पाण्डवाs were of great help to कृष्ण when He 
relieved the Earth of her burden.
	"All the beings live in Thee and therefore Thou art their abode, O 
Hari."
*710
 यद्श्रेष्ठः The pre-eminent amongst the Yadavas.
	"By wise men who are well-versed in the meaning of the पुराणा-s. 
It is said that गोपाल  will raise the यादवा  clan which has sunk to 
a low level."
*711
 सन्निवासः The abode of the saintly.
	Though He has assumed the human nature and the actions of ordinary 
human beings, He is the abode of rest for great saints like Sanaka. Vide.
	"(श्री कृष्ण  in गोकुल ) is the object of meditation for Sanaka and 
other seers, who remain there, who are flawless, who have attained 
perfection in योगा and who do the meditation with their eyes fixed at the tip of their nose."
*712
 सुयामुनः He with the delightful sport in the yamuna river.
	He is सुयामुनः  because all His activities are connected with yamuna, 
activities which are pure, auspicious and fascinating like water-sport 
(in its water), culling of flowers (on its banks), and dance with the 
गोपा-s (on its sands).
*713
 भूतावासः He who is the abode of all creatures. Though He is 
in the form of Krishna, His superhuman nature of being the abode of all 
creatures has not been concealed.
	He Who is the abode of all creatures.
	Though He is in the form of कृष्ण , His superhuman nature 
of being the abode of all creatures has not been concealed. He is 
भूतावासः .
	"All the beings live in Thee and therefore Thou art 
their abode, O Hari."
*714
 वासुदेवः  The Deity that presides over the tweleve-lettered (Vasideva)
       Mantra.
	When He is the son of वासुदेवः , He keeps within Himself His nature 
as the Supreme Deity that presides over the double six-lettered Manthra, 
So He is वासुदेवः. It is because of this, that that वासुदेवः Who is in 
the aspect of Wakeful Emanation is particularised as the Deity Incarnate 
in Matthura. Vide
	"Unto Him Who is connected with Matthura and Whose acts are all 
fascinating and wonderful."
*715
 सर्वासुनिलयः The Abode of all Souls.
	He is सर्वासुनिलयः , the one Support of the lives of all, vide
	Without कृष्ण  by their side all the cowpens (were not happy)."
	"The City of the भारता-s (Hasthina-pura) felt very happy with 
कृष्णा in their midst (after His arrival there) like the Sunless day 
with the Sun and a windless day with the breeze."
*716
 अनलः The Insatiate. 
	Even though He does all things for His devotees, still He is 
insatiate. (Analah). He is not satisfied and feels that He has not 
done anything for them:
	"(That cry for help uttered by Draupadi even from a distance 
calling me 'गोविन्दा ' even though I was far away) (at द्वारक ), ॏ 
that cry is never away from My mind like a debt that has increased 
with the interest accumulated on it."
	Or He cannot put up with the offence committed against His devotees. 
So does He declare
	"At this time of destruction two persons will not all be forgiven 
by Me. I will kill Him who obstructs the conduct of a sacrifice and 
also him who is ill-disposed towards the पाण्डवा-s."
*717
 दर्पहा The pride destroyer.
	He is Darpaha removes only the pride of the gods (and does not 
harm them) as is seen in His various acts like the lifting up of the 
गोवर्धन  mountain (against the lashing rains of Indra), the carrying 
away of the पराजित  tree from the garden of Indra, and in the chopping 
off of the grove-like arms of बाण (asura).
*718
 दर्पदः The Pride-giver 
	He gave pride (Darpada) to the यादवा-s and allowed them to 
indulge in drinking by destroying their foes, constructing the 
impregnable city of द्वारक , carrying away the treasures named 
Sankha and Padma, as well as the पराजित  tree and the Sudharma 
(the Assembly Hall of the gods)
*719
 अदृप्तः He who is not proud, still He is not self-conceited.
	Still He is not self-conceited. In सभा पर्वम् 
	"(Even though he did so many great things) like these, He never 
became proud on account of His majestic nature."
	Or the reading may be 'Druptha' which means proud. He took 
pride in being fondled with love by यशोद and नन्दगोप .
*720
 दुर्धरः The Uncontrollable.
	Even in the sportive activities in His childhood, He, like an 
elephant in ruts, could not be controlled by them both. (Durdhara).
His actions were naughty and uncontrollable. As यशोद  said.
	"O Thou of naughty acts! Now run away if Thou canst."-
	Or He was unassailable to the evil-hearted.
	"These men of little knowledge want to seize and bind Him just 
as a boy or weak girls think of keeping under control the blazing fire 
with a piece of cloth."
	"The wind cannot be caught by the hand, nor the earth by the 
head (of a man). Similarly केशव  cannot be caught by force."
*721
 अपराजितः The Invincible.
	Again in the भरत युद्ध , all the five पाण्डवा-s were without 
any supporters. They were not defeated by the hundred sons of 
धृतराष्ट्र  who were very strong with great armies, because 
they were supported by श्री कृष्ण , the invincible (अपराजित ).
	In the अरण्य पर्व , indra says to कर्ण  :
	"In the great fight, you can kill one thundering warrior, but 
not that one, (Arjuna) who is protected by the great God (श्री कृष्ण)."
	"कृष्ण , Whom the Vedic scholars declare as the Invincible Hari, 
Who had assumed the form of Wild Boar (वराह ) and Who is the 
Incomparable नारायण ."
	The "Words of rudra to Jayadratha are :-- "In the fight you can 
ward off the attacks of all invincible and indestructible warriors except 
that long-armed Arjuna who is unassailable even to the gods."
	"That great Arjuna, who is protected by कृष्ण कृष्ण  Who is the 
Unknowable Deity and Who bears the conch, discus and mace (as arms)."
	"The best of men! Victory is quite assured for him whose charioreer 
Thou hast agreed to be. There is no defeat for him."
	भीष्म , द्रोण and others also say in one voice :
	"With this one bow I can annihilate all the पाण्डवाs if  विष्णु  is 
not their Protector  विष्णु  Who is the Supreme पुरुष  and Who is the 
Cause of the Universe.
	"Truth is steady in a Brahmin; humility is certain in the pious; 
wealth is sure in the skilful; Victory is certain in नारायण ."
	"He is invincible, eternal and steady."
	"He is unconquered and is the wielder of the sword,"
	"Where कृष्ण  is, there victory is certain."
	"Where कृष्ण, the Lord of the योगा-s is, (where पार्था , the 
bow-armed Arjuna is, there is prosperity, there is victory, there 
is welath and there is firm justicethis is my conclusion)."
	In the आयुर्वेद चक्र - (संहित ), मन्त्र  to be chanted while 
pounding the medicine is :
	"I do not know defeat in वासुदेव ; I do not know the marriage 
of my mother; I do not know the complete drying of the waters of the 
ocean. This its true. On the varacity of this statement, may this 
medicine be pounded and be effective."
	In वैतरण , speaking about the poison-removing Manthra, it 
is said; "(Let this be effective) imperturbable like the ocean, steady 
like the हिमवान् , unapproachable like the fire, and unconquerable like 
नारायण ."
*722
 विश्वमूर्तिः He who has the Universe as His body.
How is it that the strong cannot conquer the weak? This is because 
the whole world is His body. It is well-known that no one will do 
anything which is harmful to himself. With this idea in mind, the 
poet says; विश्वमूर्तिः '. Vide
	"O गुदाकेश  (Arjuna)' I am the inner Soul Who resides in the 
hearts of all beings."
	(गदक  means lethargy and isa means the conqueror. गुदाकेश  is 
one of the names of Arjuna signifying that he has overcome lethargy).
*723
 महामूर्तिः He of immense form. He is Mahaa-moorthih since His body
      is the resort for the entire Universe.
	He is महा-मूर्तिः  since His body is the resort for the entire 
Universe. Vide
	"गुदाकेश  See now the whole Universe with all things, moving and 
non-moving, in one corner of my body and you may also see whatever else 
you wish to see."
*724
 दीप्तमूर्तिः He with shining form. 
	Any object shining with its qualities owes this characteristic to 
Him because of its being His body. So He is दीप्तमूर्तिः . Vide :
	"Whatever being is possessed of lordly power or splendour or is 
energetic in noble endeavours (know that it has sprung from a fraction 
of my power)." And so on.
*725
 अमूर्तिमान्  He who is the master of even subtile things.
	All things subtle and formless like Avyaktha (Prakruthi), individual 
souls etc., they also are His possessions. So He is अमूर्तिमान् . Vide :
	"Earth, Water, Fire, Wind ॏ.. (all these  are Mine)."
	"This is My Prakruthi, which is lower. There is another Prakruthi 
which is higher than this. (Know that it also belongs to Me)."
	"Whose body the Avyaktha (the Unmanifested Prakruthi) is".
	"Whose body the individual soul is."
	This name अमूर्तिमान्  should not be taken to signify the negation of 
a form for भगवान् , since it will be contrary to the statement found 
earlier and later, that He has forms. Again the use of the affix 
'mathup' (signifying possession of something) in the word 
'अमूर्तिमान् ' will become meaningless if the forms as such 
are negated.
*726
 अनेकमूर्तिः He of many forms.
	He is अनेकमूर्तिः  He of many forms.
	He is अनेकमूर्तिः  since, He has many forms which are peculiar 
to Him. Even when He is as कृष्ण , He has not given up His four (व्यूह ) 
forms वासुदेव etc. Again it is said :
	"In order to be always in the company of His 16100 Queens, Lord Srं 
कृष्ण , the Son of देवकी , took as many forms."
*727
 अव्यक्तः He who is not manifest. 
	Having assumed the form of an ordinary human being. He conceals 
His true nature.
	"To all I am not manifest (as the Supreme Deity)."
	"Neither through the वेदा-s, nor through austerities (Is it 
possible for any one to see Me as you have done, O Arjuna!)
*728
 शतमूर्तिः He with a hundre forms. 
	श्री कृष्ण  assumed a cosmic form for the sake of Arjuna who 
wanted to see Him in full.
	"O Arjuna! Look at My bodies which are in hundreds and thousands."
*729
 शताननः The hundred faced.
	In the same context Arjuna himself says :
	"Having many mouths and eyes, (many wonderful aspects, many 
divine ornaments and many divine weapons held erect)."
*730
 एकः The Unique. 
	He is एकः , unique and matchless since, with reference to His 
supreme greatness, there is no one who can be equated with Him. 
Statements like 'two Brahmins' three क्षत्रिया-s etc. are current 
because there are many who can be classified under the same head as 
Brahmins or क्षत्रिया-s . In regard to भगवान्  there is no one 
equal to Him possessing such special characteristics. So He is एक , 
the One Who is unique. Vide :
	"He is the King of the whole world.:"
	"There is no one like Him."
	"एक " is derived from the root 'I' (to go). The affix 'क्ष' is 
added to the roots 'I' (to (go), 'bhi' (to fear 'kai') to (to sound 
(etc.) ('Ih'=एकः ; kai=काकः ).
*731
 नैकः He who is not one only. 
	This Oneness is not based upon the negation of all things, or on 
illusion, or by intermixture or modifications etc. He has all things 
which are His glorious possessions and which are of a nature different 
from His. Therefore He is not One. Vide :
	"O Arjuna, the destroyer of enemies! There is no end to the divine 
glories of Mine. (What I have stated in detail is only a part of My 
glories.)"
*732
सः  The Generator. 
	Beginning from His childhood. He spreads knowledge about Him which 
is well known to all. So He is 'Sah'
	The word 'Sah' is derived from the verb 'syathi' (spreads or 
generates). The affix 'da' comes after the roots 'sam' 'muढi', and 
'syathi' (to spread)".
*733
 वः The Dweller. In accordance with his reputation, He dwells in all.
	In accordance with His reputation, He dwells in all. So He is Vah'.
	"The  affix 'da' comes after the root 'वसति ' (dwells)."
	"All being dwell in Him Who is Himself all beings and the Inner 
Soul of all. He also dwells in all of them without exception. 
Therefore, O sage, He is signified by the letter "va".
*734
 कः He who shines.
	Though He dwells in things that are dirty, still He is resplendent..
	"The affix 'da' has been added to the verb 'कानती ' (shines).
*735
 किं What ? 
	He is to be enquired into by all without any motive who are desirous 
of knowing the objects of their desire.
	"He is to be sought after; He is to be known with eagerness,"
	'Kim' is derived from the root 'prachh' (to ask or to be eager 
to know). "The affix 'im' comes after the roots 'prachh', 'damsi' 
etc., and the substhitute 'ka' also comes." (prachh+ im-k+im=kim).
*736
 यत् He who takes efforts.
	He is yath since, He takes all efforts for their protection. Vide
	"Whoever remembers Me always repeating the names 'Kriढखa', 
'कृष्ण ', 'कृष्ण ', I lift him up from Naraka (hell) just as one 
takes a lotus by brushing aside the water."
	"I remember My devotee and take him to the Supreme abode."
	'Yath' is derived from the root 'yath' ('to attempt') and the 
affix 'kvip' has been added.
*737
 तत् He who increases
	The nasal of 'gam' and others is always elided before 'kvi' and 
here 'Kvip'. By this rule the nasal is lost and there is the 
augment 'thuk' (t). Hence the usage 'thath' in the following:
	"That superior lustre of the Lord, the cause of the Universe."
	"The threefold expression 'ॐ Thath Sath' is regarded as 
(the characterisation) of the Brahman". And so on.
*738
 पदमनुत्तमम् The supreme goal. 
He is the Unsurpassed Goal since, it is the great desire of all 
to attain Him. The word 'Padam' is derived from the verb 'पदयते ' 
which means 'that which is attained'.
*739
 लोकबन्धुः The Relative of the World
	Thus He blesses all without exception. The relationship which is 
the cause of this quality is spoken of as 'लोक बन्धुः '.
"नारायण  is the mother, father, brother abode, refuge, friend 
and the final goal".
	"I am the father of this Universe." And so on.
	The word 'bandhu' is derived from the root 'bandh' (to tie).
	"The affix 'u' comes after the roots 'Sr' 'Svr', 'snih'- 'bandh' etc.
*740
 लोकनाथः  The protector of the world. 
The unique relationship which is the cause of that attachment and 
which is natural to Him is next delineated  लोकनाथः  ,  Master.
*741
 माधव The consort of lakshmi.
The special relationship of paramathma with all beings is described. 
The name माधव  indicates that His relationship of the world along with 
श्री  (लक्षमी ) is that of a father and mother.
	Or He is a scion of the Race of the Madhus.
	Or in another way also; "O भारत  Realise माधव  by means of 
the observance of silence (मा), meditation (dha) and योग (va)."
*742
 भक्तवत्सलः Affectionate towards the devotees.
	His special attitude towards devotees who, as described above, are 
eager to cultivate the relationship with Him as Master and kinsman, is 
described by the name Bhaktha vathsala. His joy of having attained 
them is so great that He forgets all other desires.
*743
 सुवर्णवर्णो The Golden-hued.
	Like the quality of affection mentioned above, He has a celestial 
hue which is flawless and effulgent like polished gold Vide;
	When the seer realises Him of golden hue."
	"He has a form which is respldent like gold and is capable of being 
seen by the mind (undisturbed) as in a dream."
	"Him Who has the lustre of the Sun."
	"(The Supreme person (परमात्म ) is हिरण्य -is beneficent and 
charming  His body is of golden hue."
*744
 हेमाङ्गः He of golden limbs. 
	The limbs of His body which are eternal, celestial and composed 
of Saththva गुणा  are endowed with a golden hue.
	"The Supreme Person of golden hue is seen."
*745
 वराङ्ग He of a magnificient body.
	This form, which is spoken of in the Upanishads and the celestial 
marks of which are concealed (from mortal eyes), was manifested as 
prayed for by देवकि . Vide
	"आनक दुन्दुभि , i.e. वासुदेव , saw Him Who was born. He had 
the colour of the petal of a full-blown blue lily. He had four arms 
and the mole Srं vathsa on His chest. वासुदेव  began to praise Him."
*746
 चन्दनाङ्गदी He who is adorned with delightful armlets.
	Though the body is not bedecked with jewels (as it is a jewel 
by itself), pleasing things get themselves attached to it and produce 
the effect of its being adorned. Or He is चन्दनाङ्गदी  since, 
He has ornaments celestial like bracelets and other of which the 
armlet is but an example here.
	The affix 'inin' is added in the sense of abundance.
*747
 वीरहा The slayer of the strong demons.
	Even though He was but an innocent infant, He slew the deceitful 
असुरा-s like पुतन , Sakata, the Twin Arjuna trees and others without 
leaving any trace behind since they were the enemies of gods.
*748
 विषमः He of conflicting acts. 
	He is विषम , not uniform since, He acts in different ways with 
different persons. Towards the devotees He was benevolent, whereas towards 
the ill-disposed He was terrific.
*749
 शून्यः He who was devoid of defects. 
	Though He was in the form of a human being, He was absolutely bereft 
of all defects.
	The word 'शून्य ' is derived from the root 'शून् ' (to go) The affix 
'nyath' has been added to the root.
*750
 घृताशीः He Who is desirous of making the world prosperous.
घृतम् means sprinkling and the word is derived from the root 
'घृ ' (to sprinkle). He makes the world prosperous by means of His 
benevolent qualities; or He has a desire for the butter and ghee in 
the houses of the cowherds in गोकुल .
*751
 अचलः The Unshakable. 
	He was unconquerable to the evil-minded दुर्योधन  and others.
*752
 चलः He Who swerves. 
	He is called  चलः , because for the sake of helping the पाण्डवा-s 
who were His devotees, He even swerved from the righteous path of keeping 
His word. श्री कृष्ण  had taken a vow that He would not handle or use any 
weapon in the भारत-युद्ध्  . But in order to save Arjuna from भीष्म  
He did not mind breaking His vow with the Chakra in the uplifted hand 
He ruढed towards  भीष्म  to attack him. Vide-
	"श्री कृष्ण , the younger brother of महेन्द्र  (in one incarnation) 
seized the Chakra and with a loud war-cry rushed forward against Bhंढma). 
Seeing the angry कृष्ण   all the beings (in the battlefield of कुरुक्षेत्र) 
cried aloud in distress thinking that the destruction of the कौरवा-s 
was certain.
	वासुदेव  the Lord of the Universe, jumped down  from the chariot 
with the Chakra in hand and rushed forward as though he was going to 
annihilate all the army. He shone like the धूमकेतु  (the comet) 
which rises to burn all the beings of the Universe.
*753
 अमानी He who is not proud. 
	He is अमानी  since, He is not self-conceited where His devotees are 
concerned. That is why He did not feel shy of going as a messenger; but 
He undertook the errand.
*754
 मानदः He who honours others. 
	He gave Arjuna the honour of being the master of the chariot and 
was ready to be his driver; He made उग्रसेन  the Sovereign and was his 
vassel; made युधिष्ठिर  the king and respected him.
*755
 मान्याः The object of honour. 
	He is to be honoured as being affectionate towards His devotees. 
Indeed, He felt Himself honoured only in that way.
	"In the battle of कुरुक्षेत्र  today when कृष्ण , the charioteer 
of Arjuna, is angry, no one amongst the सात्वता-s and the कौरवा-s 
can escape death."
*756
 लोकस्वामी  The master of the Universe.
	Who was He that acted like this? लोकस्वामी  -The Supreme Lord 
of the Universe.
*757
 त्रिलोकधृत्  He who suports the three worlds. 
	When He is really so exalted how does He come down? Because He 
is  त्रिलोकधृत्   . He shoulders the burden of supporing and nourishing 
the entire Universe.
	"I stand controlling and regulating all this Universe."
*758
 सुमेधा The well -intentioned. 
	He is always bent upon thinking about the welfare of His devotees 
and doing good to them.
	There is the suffix 'ssich' at the end of this compound word 
(सुमेधा) under the rule "The affix 'asich' comes invariably after the 
two words 'praja' I and 'मेहा ."
*759
 मेधजः He who was born as a result of a sacrifice. 
	Therefore He was born as a result of the 'मेधा' (i.e.sacrifice) 
in the form of the austeritles practised by देवकी  to get Him as son. 
So He is Mऍdhajah. I deed He spoke to देवकी  as follows:
	"O Revered Lady! You praised Me before desirous of having Me as 
your son. Your prayers have become fruitful today since I have taken 
birth out of your womb."
	"O Auspicious Lady! When you worshipped Me in the proper manner 
before, I became pleased and made a promise to you (that I would be 
born as your son). That has been carried out now."
*760
 धन्यः The Blessed.
	श्री कृष्ण  considered that to be born as the son of देवकी  was a 
great fortune. Now that he had acquired it, He became Dhanya (Blessed).
	"The affix 'yath' comes in the sense of 'who obtains it' after 
the words 'dhana' and 'gana' being in the second case in the 
construction." (Dhana+ya=Dhanya).
*761
 सत्यमेधा He of true thoughts.
	"I have taken birth out of your womb."
	"I am born as a relative of yours."
	When श्री कृष्ण   spoke to देवकी  and the cowherd boys thus 
respectively, His idea that He really belonged to the same यादवा  
clan to which वासुदेव  and the गोपा -boys belonged, was real and not 
that He outwardly acted like that (without that thought in His mind).
 So He is सत्यमेधाः . He verily spoke to the गोपा  thus:
	"If you have a real love for Me and think of me as you think of
 yourselves (i.e. that I am a गोपा  as all of you are).'
	"I am neither a god, nor a Gandharva, neither a यक्ष  (demi-god) 
nor a दानव  (demon). I am a born relative of you all. You must not 
think of me in any other way."
*762
 धराधरः He who bore the mountain, Govardhana.
	When the angry Indra was giving trouble to all the cows and the 
cowherds, श्री कृष्ण  thought:
	"The cowpen with all the cows and the cowherds should be protected 
by me now. I shall by force uproot this mountain with big boulders at 
once and hold it over their heads as a big umbrella and save them all 
(from this distress)." 
*763
 तेजोवृषो He Who showers splendour. 
	Thus He showers splendour in the form of the protection of the 
good-hearted beings (cows and cowherds). So He is तेजोवृषः .
*764
 द्युतिधरः He who possessed a majesty.
	Even in His young age कृष्ण  had a superhuman majesty which 
cowed down Indra. Hence Dyuthi-dharah.
*765
 सर्वशस्त्रभृतां वरः The best amongst those warrioir who are armed with
 all weapons.
	He was the foremost amongst those wlelders of weapons in His 
fights against Naraka (Asura), (King) जरासन्ध  and others.
	"For the Lord of the world Who was diverting Himself with the 
activities of the human beings it was mere play to discharge different 
kinds of weapons against His enemies."
*766
 प्रग्रहः The Controller like the reins. 
	Arjuna was controlled as though by reins by श्री कृष्ण  Who was 
his charioteer. Hence भगवान्  is called Pragraha (the reins).
*767
 निग्रहः The Subduer. 
	All the enemies were subdued by श्री कृष्ण  by His own supeior 
skill as a charioteer, without expecting the support of the valour 
of Arjuna. So He is called Nigraha.
*768
 व्यग्रः He who was very zealous (enthusiastic).
	Inputting down the enemies of Arjuna, कृष्ण could not bear the 
delay in the normal process of the war; and so he Himself began to act 
as he did when he ruढed against भीष्म  to attack Him. Vide
	"O सात्यकी ! (Sini-praviral) Those who have gone, have gone for
 ever. They who are here, let them also go at once. You will see now 
that भीष्म  is thrown down from his chariot and also द्रोण  along with 
his own army." So saying,कृष्ण jumped down from his chariot and 
leaving the horses advanced forward against  भीष्म.)" And so on.
	(शिनि -प्रवीर - 	शिनि is the name of a warrior belonging to the 
यादवा  clan.सात्यकी  is his grandson, the son of सात्यक  and his 
name was दृष्ठ-द्युम्न .)
	"The words 'राजा' (a leader), 'Indra' (foremost), 'agra' 
(first) etc. are iregularly formed with the affix ran."
	The word 'व्यग्र ' is derived from the root 'aga' (to move 
in a zigzag manner) preceded by the preposition 'vi'.
*769
 नैकशृङ्गः He who adopted divesre tactics. 
	He is Naika-srunga since He adopted several devices for bringing 
about the fall of the enemies like giving sound advice, skillfully 
driving the chariot, pretending that he would not use a weapon, but 
actually making use of His weapon at the opportune moment.
	The word 'srunga' is derived from the root 'sir' (to hurt). 
'The affix 'gan' with the augment 'nuth' comes after the root 'sru'. 
The vowel isshortened and it is 'kith'. ('sru:' becomes 'sru').
*770
 गदाग्रजः The elder brother of Gada. 
	He was born before the boy गदा  by name. गदा is the son of 
सुनामा, one of the wives of वासुदेव , and was younger than कृष्ण .
*771
 चतुर्मूर्तिः He of Four Forms.
	The name of Chathur mu:rthi reminds us of the four व्युहा -s 
or Emanations which are the source for the Vibhava (Incarnations 
like राम and कृष्ण ). Even when He has taken birth in the Yadu-kula,
 He has four forms viz. Balabhadra, वासुदेव , Pradyuma and Aniruddha.
	(Bala-bhadra is the elder brother of कृष्ण ; Pradyumna is His 
on and Aniruddha His grandson.)
*772
 चतुर्बाहुः The four armed.
	The source of the व्युहा-s or Emanations is the परारूप . 
(the Transcendental Form) and it was in this Form which is natural 
to Him that He took birth from देवकी . Both in the परा and व्युहा 
रूपा भगवान्  has four arms and it was in this four-armed form that 
He was born of देवकी . When she was that form, she at once prayed to Him;
	"O The Inner Soul of all beings! Please withdraw this four armed 
form within Yourself. Let not this Kamsa that belongs to the Asura race
 know that you are the incarnation of विष्णु )."
*773
 चतुर्व्यूहः He in the form od four Emanations.
	As in the case of the four व्युहा -s in which in one वासुदेव  
vyu:ha, He has all the six qualities and in the other three व्युहा 
 in each he has two qualities. Similarly in the Vibhava अवतारा as 
कृष्ण , He as वासुदेव , has all the six qualities and in the other 
three बलराम , अनिरुद्ध  and Pradyumna He has two qualities in each.
*774
 चतुर्गतिः He who is in the form of the four goals or Purusharthas.
 	He is Himself the four kinds of the पुरुषार्थाs-Dharma, Arttha, 
कामा and मोक्षा -according to the difference in the desires of the persons 
who seek refuge in Him. (Or He bestows the posts of Indra, Brahma, 
Kaivalya or मोक्षा according to their desires).
*775
 चतुरात्मा  The four-bodied. 
	According to the capacity of the devotee to meditate on Him, 
भगवान्  manifests Himself in the ascending order in four forms as 
जाग्रत  (Wakeful state), Swapna (Dream state), सुष्प्ति  (Deep sleep) 
and तुरीय  (th Fourth). And in each of these four states He is in 
two forms, सूक्षम  and स्थूल  (subtle and Gross).
*776
 चतुर्भावः He who displays four kinds of actions.
	The Four व्यूहा are वासुदेव , संकर्षण , Pradyumna and 
Aniruddha and every one of them has the four  stages of जाग्रत् , 
Swapna, सुषुप्ति  and तुर्य . Therefore in the four व्युहा-s there 
are sixteen forms. Creation, sustenance protection and propagation 
of the शास्र्रा-s are four duties, each one of which is subdivided into 
two parts as subtle and gross. भाव  means भावना  (i.e.displaying).
*777
 चतुर्वेदवित् He who is known by those that are learned in 
the four Vedas.
	The superior mangnificence displayed in the व्यूहा  and वैभव  
is vast like the ocean, and even those who are well versed in the four 
वेदा-s and who have a knowledge of the para and अपार  (High and Low) are 
able to realise it only to an infinitely small extent and what they 
realise is like a drop in that big ocean of greatness. 
*778
 एकपात् He Whose Incarnation is only a part.
	Therefore the learned (seers) have said:
	"O ब्रह्मर्षी !     This Incarnation of the Lord as कृष्ण  in the 
yadu race is only a small part of Himself."
	"He has come down to this world only with a part of a portion 
of Himself."
	"This greatnss of विष्णु  is incomprehensible."
	"राम  was directly a fourth part of विष्णु ."
*779
 समावर्तः He who comes again and again. 
	These Incarnations of the Lord as Vibhava and व्यूहा  take 
place always, at all places, in all ways and all round. So He is 
called समावर्तः .
*780
 निवृत्तात्मा He Whose mind is turned away. 
	This incarnation of His which is associated with the world is done 
by Him due to His mercy. But His mind by itself is not affected by the 
worldly things. Therefore about Him it is said:
	"He does not speak (with any one); because there is no one greater 
than Him to be honoured by Him."
*781
 दुर्जयः  The invincible. 
	It is impossible to bring Him under control by the ordinary power 
of the human or divine beings.
	"Who can seek and find Him out if He does not ढow Himself?" So, He
 is Durjayah.
*782
 दुरतिक्रमः He Who cannot be dispensed with. 
	He is Dur-athikrama, because there is no other refuge excepting His 
own feet; (against them no one should act). So it is stated in the श्रुती 
	"If men succeed in rolling up the vast sky as a small leather-bag,
 then a person will be able to attain the end of his sufferings even 
without knowing God," (Even as the former is impossible, the latter 
also is difficult to achieveॏ)
	"Who can attain Salvation without worshipping वासुदेव ?"
	"All the वेदा-s are always singing in chorus that there is no 
other means of redemption except (the worship of) विष्णु . There is no 
doubt about this."
*783
 दुर्लभः He Who is difficult to be attained.
	If the mind of a man goes after other things, Lord जनार्दन  is 
beyond attainment."
	"O King! केशव  cannot be attained by men if their senses are 
not conquered by them." So He is Durlabha.
*784
 दुर्गमः He whom it is immpossible to attain. 
	Just as the mid-day such cannot be seen by men with weak eyes, 
भगवान्   Who is endowed with much more brilliance and splendour 
cannot be realised by weak-minded people. This is much more true 
by the maxim of दण्ड-अपूपिक .
	[दण्ड-अपूपिक-न्याय -The maxim of the stick and the cakes. 
When a stick and cakes are kept together and one says that the stick 
has been pulled down or eaten by the rats, we are naturally led to 
expect that the cakes also should have been pulled down or eaten by 
the rats as a matter of course, the two being so closely connected 
together. So, when one thing is closely connected with another in a 
particular way, and we say something of the one, it naturally follows 
that what we assert of the one can, as a matter of course, be asserted 
of the other.]
*785
 दुर्गः He who cannot be entered into. 
	He is impenetrable to those who are covered by curtains like 
nescience and others.
	"The affix 'da' comes after the verb 'gam' (to go) 'su' (well) 
and 'dur' (bad) when the resulting words denote location."
*786
 दुरावासः He whose place of residence is not easy to attain.
	Consequently the attainment of life in the Transcendent World 
of His is difficult to attain.
*787
 दुरारिहा  The Dispeller of the evil minded enemies.
	The difficulty in the attainment of भगवान्  mentioned above is 
only with reference to those who are great sinners and who are not 
eager to attain Him. This is being dealt with by the following 
twenty-four names (names 787 to 810).
	दुरारिण  are those Who follow the evil path. He gets rid of 
them by several mans like making them give up the path of the वेदा-s. 
Vide in the वैष्णव  ( पुराण ) -
	"By His powerful skill He confounded in several ways their minds 
and led them astray as a result of which there was not even one amongst
 them who had a liking for the वेदा-s. They became averse to go in the 
right path and they were easily disposed of by the gods."
*788
 शुभाङ्गः He with a bewitching form.
	How did he get into their fold? It was by virtue of His charming 
figure-शुभाङ्गः . He had such a fascinating body by which He beguiled 
and deluded the असुरा-s. It made them think that he was an extremely 
trustworthy man.
*789
 लोकसारङ्गः He who preached essential things in the world.
	How did He deceive them? लोक सारङ्गः-He explained to them that 
there are only two essential things in the world, enjoyment of the 
wordly pleasures and the attainment of salvation. He taught them this 
with appropriate reasons. Indeed He advised them to do as follows:
	"If you wish to attain salvation, follow my words."
	"The affix 'khach' comes after the verb 'gam' (to go) when a 
word ending in a case-affix is in composition with it. 
(शरम्+gam=सारङ्गः .)
	"The affix 'khach' may optionally be considered as if 
it had indicatory 'u'. The force of 'u' is to cause the elision 
of the final vowel with what follows it. (So the word may be 
सारङ्गः or सारङ्गमः .)
*790
 सुतन्तुः He who had powerful net of threads.
	To capture the असुरा-s He had an attractive and inescapable 
snare of threads. He put on the appearance of tranquility and meditation. 
That snare of threads was good and when a person was caught in it he 
could never get out of it.
*791
 तन्तुवर्धनः He who increases the meshes.  
	Thus by aggravating the taste for sin in the minds of people He 
strengthens the snare of संसार  as if by strong fibres. Vide
	"The worst of men are cruel and hate me. I always throw them 
into the cycle of संसार  (Birth and death) in demoniac births."
	"Those people of devilish temperament were deluded by my 
enchanting power and were made to abandon the path of the three
वेदा-s. Being induced by them others were made to do so, yet 
others by them, some others by the latter and still others by them.
*792
 इन्द्रकर्मा He who did all this for the sake of Indra.
	"All the gods prostrated before Him and said: 'O Lord! Be mereciful 
towards us. Please save us from the असुरा-s. We seek refuge in ती ."
	For the sake of Indra and other gods who sought His protection, 
He acted in this way. So He is Indra कर्म .
*793
 महाकर्मा He of magnanimous actions.
	Even though He is os merciful nature, decitful acts were perpetrated
 by Him only for the sake of those who had taken refuge in Him and for 
puniढing those who were wedded to unholy practices. Since all His acts 
were thus justifiable, He is महा कर्म .
*794
 कृतकर्मा He Who practiced acts.
	With the object of deceiving those of a demoniac nature, He also 
followed their acts. Hence He is कृत कर्म 
*795
 कृतागमः  The prpounder of Agamas ( Spiritual texts)
	The Propounder of आगमाs (Spiritual Texts).
	In order to establish the validity of His acts, He produced 
spiritual texts dealing with the doctrine of Buddhism, Jainism etc.
*796
 उद्भवः He who has risen above. 
	He Pretended to preach the way tom Salvation and so put on the 
appearance of one who has risen above the संसार .
*797
 सुन्दरः  He who is handsome.
	He was Sundara since, He was attractive to the eyes of the असुराs.
*798
 सुन्दः He Who softens. 
	He is called Sunda since, He almost melted the hearts of the 
असुरा-s by His fascinating form (and drew them towards Him),
*799
 रत्ननाभः He with a gemlike navel. To show off His learning he
 gently passed the hand over his belly.
	To show off His learning He genly passed the hand over his belly. 
So He is रत्न-नाभः .
*800
 सुलोचनः He of bewitching eyes. 
	He had charming eyes which enticed the tender-hearted. He was 
सुलोचन . Vide :
	"Then the mendicant who was naked and who had a shaven head."
	"Again He was clad in crimson robes and had eyes which were 
unconquered; and He deluded the minds of all by His माय ."
